The Path of Light
Rendered for the first time into English from the Bodhicharyāvatāra of Śāntideva: A manual of Mahāyāna Buddhism
Reverently bowing before the Blessed Ones, their Sons, the Body of the Law, and all the worshipful ones, I will briefly set forth in accordance with Holy Writ the way whereby the sons of the Blessed Ones enter the godly life.
Nothing new will be told here, nor have I skill in writing of books; therefore I have done this work to hallow my own thoughts, not designing it for the welfare of others.
By it the holy impulse within me to frame righteousness is strengthened; but if a fellow-creature should see it, this my book will fulfil another end likewise.
This brief estate, which once gotten is a means to all the aims of mankind, is exceeding hard to win; if one use it not for wholesome reflection, how shall it ever come again to his lot?
As in the night, amidst the gross darkness of the clouds, the lightning shows for an instant its radiance, so by the grace of the Enlightened it may hap that the mind of man turn for an instant to holy works.
Thus righteousness is feeble, and the power of evil is constant, mighty, and dire; by what righteousness could it be overcome, if there were not the Thought of Enlightenment?
Pondering through many aeons, the Supreme Saints have found this blessing, whereby a swelling joy sweeps in sweetness down the boundless waters of mankind.
They who would escape the hundreds of life’s sorrows, who would end the anguish of living creatures, and who would taste hundreds of deep delights, must never surrender the Thought of Enlightenment.
The wretch held in thrall by Life’s minions is declared a son of the Blessed Ones straightaway when the Thought of Enlightenment arises in him, and he becomes worshipful to the worlds of men and gods.
This foul form that he has taken he makes into the priceless jewel of a Conqueror’s form; oh, grasp firmly the Thought of Enlightenment, that exceedingly potent elixir!
Ho, ye who are exiles in the marts of bodied being, grasp firmly the precious jewel of the Thought of Enligtenment, which the immeasurably wise sole Guides of the world’s caravan have well assayed!
Like the plantain-tree, all other righteousness fades away after its fruit is cast; but the tree of the Thought of Enlightenment bears everlasting fruit and fades not, but is ever fecund.
Though he have wrought most grievous sins, a man by taking refuge therein escapes them straightaway; as ignorant beings under the guardianship of a mighty man escape sore terrors, why seek they not their refuge in this?
Like the time of fire at the end of a world cycle, it instantly consumes the greatest evils; its immeasurable benefits were taught to [the disciple] Sudhana by the wise Lord Maitreya.
This Thought of Enlightenment is to be understood as twofold. Briefly, it is the idea of dedication to Enlightenment and then the actual pilgrimage towards it.
As concisely stated by learned men, this difference is that between a traveller and someone desirous of travelling.
The idea of dedication to Enlightenment brings great fruit even on the wheel of rebirth, but not the uninterrupted meritoriousness of the mind which is set upon departure.
As soon as one undertakes to free himself from the unbounded realms of living beings, he concentrates his mind with steadfast thought;
that soon, in spite of sleep and repeated excitement, floods of merit, equal to the sky, begin to flow without ceasing.
This the Buddha himself correctly has asserted in the [scripture] Subāhupṛccha for the sake of beings of lesser aspiration.
One who is a kindly benefactor thinks, “I will cure the headaches of beings.” Thus by this benevolent intention he has acquired immeasurable merit.
How much more the one whishing to remove the infinite ache of every single being and for each one to create infinite virtue!
Whose mother or father is endowed with this benevolent desire? To what gods or sages or brahmans does it belong?
Even in sleep this desire has not previously arisen for these people, not even in self-interest: How much less its appearance for the sake of others?
This unprecedented, distinctive jewel among beings: How is it given birth? This intention which is for the welfare of others does not appear in others even in self-interest.
This merit—of the seed of the world’s joy, of the medicine for the world’s sorrow, of the jewel of the mind: How, indeed, may it be measured?
The worship of Buddhas is excelled by merely having a desire for goodness: How much more by zeal for the total welfare of all beings?
Eager to escape sorrow, men rush into sorrow; from desire of happiness they blindly slay their own happiness, enemies to themselves;
they hunger for happiness and suffer manifold pains; whence shall come one so kind as he who can satisfy them with all manner of happiness, allay all their pains,
shatter their delusion—whence such a friend, and whence such a holy deed?
He who repays good deed with a good deed is praised; what shall be said of the Son of Enlightenment, who does kindness unsought?
He who sets a banquet before a few is called “doer of righteousness,” and is honoured by the world, because in his pride he entertains men for half a day with brief largesse of mere food;
but what of him who bestows on a measureless number of creatures a satisfaction of all desires unbounded in time and perishing not when the world of heaven perishes?
Such is the Master of the Banquet, the Son of the Conqueror; whosoever sins in his heart against him, saith the Lord, shall abide in hell as many ages as the moments of his sins.
But he whose spirit is at peace with them shall thence get abundant fruit; and truly, wrong to the Sons of the Conqueror can be done only by great effort, but kindness towards them is easy.
I do homage to the bodies of them in whom has arisen the choice jewel of the Thought, and even the ill-treatment of whom leads to happiness; in these mines of bliss I seek my refuge.
Chapter I: The Praise of the Thought of Enlightenment
To win this jewel of the Thought I offer perfect worship to the Blessed Ones, to the stainless gem of the Good Law, and to the Sons of the Enlightened, oceans of virtues.
All flowers, fruits, and healing herbs, all gems and all waters clear and pleasent in the world,
likewise mountains of jewels, forests sweet in their solitude, climbing plants bright with ornaments of flowers, trees whose branches bend with goodly fruit,
fragrant incenses, trees of desire, and jewel-bearing trees in the worlds of the gods and their kin, lakes bedecked with lilies and wondrously pleasant with the cries of swans,
harvests springing without tilth and crops of grain, and all else adorning them whom we worship, all things that are bounded by the spreading ethereal sphere and are in the possession of none,
I take in spirit and offer as guerdon to the Supreme Saints and their Sons. Worthy of choicest gifts and great of compassion, may they mercifully accept this of me!
I am exceeding poor, and without righteousness; there is naught else for me to offer. So may their care for others’ weal be for my weal, and let the Lords take this in their native grace.
Yea, I give to the Conquerors and their Sons myself entirely. Take me for your chattel, O noble beings; I make myself in love your slave.
By being your chattel I am freed from fear in life, and work good for living creatures; I escape my former sins, and do evil no more.
In their houses of perfumed bathing, with delightful pillars of blazing jewels, with canopies shining with pearls, with their mosaic pavements brilliant and clear;
I myself will prepare the bath of the Buddhas and their sons, with the playing of songs, using many water jars encrusted with great jewels and filled with flowers and fragrant waters agreeable to the mind.
With garments perfumed, purified of dirt, unequaled, I dry their bodies. Then I give them well-coloured, well-perfumed, choice robes.
With celestial, delicate, smooth, varied, handsome garments, with choice ornaments; with such as these I adorn Samantabhadra, Ajita, Mañjughoṣa, Lokeśvara, and the rest.
With the perfumes which pervade all of the three thousand worlds, with the uttermost perfumes, I anoint the bodies of all the great sages, who shine, with a radiance like well-refined, well-polished, and well-cleaned, gold.
With the blossoms of the coral tree, the blue lotus, jasmine, and the like; with all perfumed and delightful flowers, I praise the most praiseworthy best of sages with beautifully formed garlands.
I envelop them with clouds of incense, delighting the mind with dense, expanding aromas; and I offer to them an offering of various moist and dry foods and libations.
I offer them jewel lamps placed in rows on golden lotuses; and on mosaic pavements anointed with perfume I scatter many pleasing flowers.
Celestial clouds delightful as songs of praise, ornamenting the four directions, shining as garlands of gems and pearl necklaces: These also I offer to the Benevolent Ones.
I place before those who are the great sages lofty jewel parasols encrusted with pearls, exceedingly handsome, with pleasingly shaped golden handles.
Hereafter may delightful clouds of worship arise, and clouds of music and song which thrill all creatures.
Upon all jewels of the true Dharma, shrines, and images, may the rains of flowers, jewels, and such, fall without end.
As Mañjughoṣa and the others worship the Conquerors, thus I worship the Lord Buddhas and their sons;
and I praise with hymns, with oceans of sound, these Seas of Virtue. Let clouds of singing praise unfailingly arise to them.
With as many obeisances as there are atoms in all the Domains I adore all the Enlightened Ones of the past, present, and future, the Law, and the noble Congregation.
I worship all the memorial-sanctuaries and the dwellings of the Son of the Enlightened; I salute the preceptors and the worshipful holy men.
I take refuge with the Enlightened One, awaiting the coming of the perfect Light; I take refuge in the Law and the Congregation of sons of Enlightenment.
With clasped hands I make supplication to the Enlightened Ones dwelling in all regions and to the most merciful Sons of Enlightenment.
Whatever be the sin that I, poor brute, in my beginningless round of past births or in this birth have in my madness done or made others do
or approved for my own undoing, I confess the transgression thereof, and am stricken with remorse.
Whatsoever wrong I have done by sin against the Three Gems or father and mother or other elders by deed, word, or thought,
whatever dire offence has been wrought by me, a sinner foul with many a stain, O Masters, I confess all.
How may I escape from it? Speedily save me, lest death come too soon upon me ere my sin have faded away.
Death considers not what works be done or not done, and strikes us through our ease, a sudden thunderbolt, unsure alike for the healthy and the sick.
For the sake of things unloved and things loved have I sinned these many times; and never have I thought that I must surrender everything and depart.
They whom I love not, they whom I love, I myself, shall be no more, naught shall remain.
All the things whereof I have feeling shall pass away into a memory; like the vision of a dream, all departs, and is seen no more.
The many whom I love or love not pass away while I stand here; only the dire sin wrought for their sake remains before me.
I understood not that I was but a chance comer, and through madness, love, or hatred I have wrought many a sin.
Unceasingly through night and day the waning of vital force increases; must I not die?
Lying here on my bed, or standing amidst my kin, I must suffer the agonies of dissolution alone.
Whence shall I find a kinsman, whence a friend, when the Death-god’s messengers seize me? Righteousness alone can save me then, and for that I have not sought.
Clinging to brief life, I have been blind to this terror, heedless; O my Masters, grievous guilt have I gathered.
He who is taken to be maimed of his limbs at once withers away; thirst racks him, his sight is darkened, the world is changed to his sight.
How then will it be with me when I am in the charge of the Death-god’s hideous messengers, consumed by a fever of mighty terror, covered with filth,
looking with timid glances to the four quarters of heaven for aid? Who will be the friend to save me from that awful terror?
I shall see in the heavens no help, and sink back into madness; then what shall I do in that place of horror?
Now, now I come for refuge to the mighty Lords of the world, the Conquerors eager for the world’s protection, who allay all fear;
to the Law learned by them I come with all my heart for refuge, and to the Congregation of the Sons of Enlightenment.
Trembling with fear, I give myself to Samantabhadra, and again I give myself, by my own action, to Mañjughoṣa;
and to the Lord Avalokita, who is entirely occupied with the practice of compassion, I, who am terrified, cry aloud a cry of suffering, “May he protect me, a sinner!”
To the noble Ākāśagarbha and to Kṣitigarbha, and indeed to all the great Compassionate Beings, I cry aloud, looking for protection.
And I worship the Lord of the Thunderbolt. When they have seen him, the messengers of death and the other evil beings are frightened and they flee to the four directions.
I now go terrified to you for refuge—after having neglected your instruction, because of beholding fear. May you quickly extinguish fear.
Dreading even a passing disease, one would not violate the command of a physician. Why, then, after being ravaged by four hundred and four diseases?
Yet all men dwelling in Jambudvīpa [India] perish because of even a single disease for which no medicine is found.
Because I violate the command of the all-knowing Physician, the one who in such a case takes away all cause of pain, shameful is my complete confusion!
I will stand with extreme care upon any other precipice; why not, then, upon that precipice which is a thousand worlds in depth and of immense duration?
Perhaps death does not come today, but nonetheless I ought not to be at ease; inevitably the hour comes when I shall not exist.
By whom is security given to me? and how shall I escape? Inevitably I shall not exist. How can the mind be composed?
What lasting value survives from the vanished experience of an earlier day? What remains to me when I have neglected the word of the gurus?
Having forsaken this land of the living, with its relatives and friends, I shall go somewhere all alone. What to me is all that is dear or not dear?
This thought is with me always, night and day, sorrow is caused by the evil deed. How then can I escape?
Whatever guilt I have gathered in my foolishness and delusion, alike the wrong of nature and the wrong of commandment,
I confess it all as I stand before the Masters with clasped hands, affrighted with grief, and making obesance again and again.
May my Lords take my transgression as it is; never more, O Masters, will I do this unholy work.
Chapter II: Confession of Sin
I rejoice exceedingly in all creatures’ good works that end the sorrows of their evil lot; may the sorrowful find happiness!
I rejoice in the deliverance of embodied beings from the griefs of life’s wanderings, and in the Sonship of Enlightenment, and the Enlightenment that belongs to the Saviours.
I rejoice in the Commanders’ oceans of Thought, that bring happiness and establish welfare for all creatures.
With clasped hands I entreat the perfectly Enlightened Ones who stand in all regions that they kindle the lamp of the Law for them who in their blindness fall into sorrow.
With clasped hands I pray the Conquerors who yearn for the Stillness that they abide here for endless aeons, lest this world become blind.
In reward for all this righteousness that I have won by my works I would fain become soother of all the sorrows of all creatures.
May I be a balm to the sick, their healer and servitor, until sickness come never again;
may I quench with rains of food and drink the anguish of hunger and thirst; may I be in the famine of the ages’ end their drink and meat;
may I become an unfailing store for the poor, and serve them with manifold things for their need.
My own being and my pleasures, all my righteousness in the past, present, and future I surrender indifferently, that all creatures may win to their end.
The Stillness lies in surrender of all things, and my spirit is fain for the Stillness; if I must surrender all, it is best to give it for fellow-creatures.
I yield myself to all living things to deal with me as they list; they may smite or revile me for ever, bestrew me with dust,
play with my body, laugh and wanton; I have given them my body, why shall I care?
Let them make me do whatever works bring them pleasure; but may never mishap befall any of them by reason of me.
If the spirit of any be wroth or pleased with me, may that be ever a cause for them to win all their desires.
May all who slander me, or do me hurt, or jeer at me, gain a share in Enlightenment.
I would be a protector of the unprotected, a guide of wayfarers, a ship, a dyke, and a bridge for them who seek the further Shore;
a lamp for them who need a lamp, a bed for those who need a bed, a slave for all beings who need a slave.
I would be a magic gem, a lucky jar, a spell of power, a sovereign balm, a wishing-tree, a cow of plenty, for embodied beings.
As the earth and other elements are for the manifold service of the countless creatures dwelling in the whole of space,
so may I in various wise support the whole sphere of life lodged in space, until all be at peace.
As the Blessed of old took the Thought of Enlightenment and held fast to the rule for sons of Enlightenment in the order thereof,
so do I frame the Thought of Enlightenment for the weal of the world, and so will I observe these rules in their sequence.
When he has thus taken the Thought of Enlightenment in a spirit of grace, the sage must fill his thought with gladness in order to strengthen the issue.
This day my birth is fruitful, my human life a blessing; this day have I been born in the race of the Enlightened, now am I their son.
And henceforth mine is the task of them who work worthily of their race, lest any blemish fall upon this stainless stock.
This Thought of Enlightenment has arisen within me I know not how, even as a gem might be gotten by a blind man from a dunghill;
it is an elixir made to destroy death in the world, an unfailing treasure to relieve the world’s poverty,
a supreme balm to allay the world’s sickness, a tree under which may rest all creatures wearied with wandering over life’s paths,
a bridge open to all wayfarers for passing over hard ways, a moon of thought arising to cool the fever of the world’s sin,
a great sun driving away the gloom of the world’s ignorance, a fresh butter created by the churning of the milk of the Good Law.
For the caravan of beings who wander through life’s paths hungering to taste of happiness this banquet of bliss is prepared, that will satisfy all creatures coming to it.
I summon to-day the world to the estate of Enlightenment, and meanwhile to happiness; may gods, daemons, and other beings rejoice in the presence of all the Saviours!
Chapter III: Taking the Thought of Enlightenment
The son of the Conqueror, who has thus firmly laid hold of the Thought of Enlightenment, must constantly strive without slackening to observe the rule.
If a work be undertaken in haste and without right reflection, one may well consider whether it should be done or no, even though a vow have been made;
but how should I delay in this work, which has been propounded by the Enlightened Ones, by their most sake Sons, and by me likewise according to the measure of my power?
If I fulfil not my vow by deeds, I shall be false to all beings, and what a fate will be mine!
Even of a small matter it is said that he who gives not what he has purposed in thought to give becomes a tortured ghost;
how, then, shall it be with him who proffers aloud and earnestly the gift of supreme happiness? I shall be false to all the world, and what a fate will be mine!
Only the All-knowing One understands the inscrutable course of action which releases those men even after the Thought of Enlightenment has been forsaken.
Every transgression of the Bodhisattva is of extreme gravity, since, as he transgresses, the welfare of all beings is destroyed because of it.
Anyone who creates an obstacle to his merit, even for an instant, has no limit to his misfortune; because he destroys the welfare of others.
Indeed, the one who has smitten the benefactor of even a single being, will be smitten. How much more when he smites the beings who dwell throughout the immensity of all space?
As a consequence he is buffeted in the cycle of rebirth between the power of transgression and the power of the Thought of Enlightenment; he delays a long while in the obtaining of the stages leading to Enlightenment.
Therefore I must heedfully fulfil my vow; if I labour not this very day, down, down I fall.
Numberless are the Enlightened who have passed by in search of all living beings; and through my own fault I have not come into their healing hands.
If this day also I shall be as I have been again and again, misery, sickness, death, maiming, dismemberment, and the like will fall to my lot;
and when shall I win that most rare boon, the coming of one of the Enlightened, faith, human birth, and fitness to labour in righteousness,
a day of health with food and no vexations? Life is a brief instant, and plays us false; the body is like a thing held in precarious tenure.
Truly with deeds such as mine have been I shall not again win human birth; and if I win it not, evil awaits me; whence should good come?
Since I work not righteous when I am able, how shall I do it when crazed by the pains of hell?
I do no righteous work, and gather sin; the very name of good destiny is lost to me for millions of aeons.
Therefore the Lord has said that human birth is exceedingly hard to win; hard as for a turtle to pass its neck into the hole of a yoke in the ocean.
Because of the evil wrought in a single instant, one is placed in the Avīci hell for an aeon. Because of the evil accumulated in an eternity of time, a good state is out of the question.
Even after having experienced that duration [of sorrow], one is not released, because while it is being experienced other evil is begotten.
Having obtained a brief moment which is endowed with such qualities, there is certainly no greater deception and no greater stupidity than not applying myself to goodness;
and if, indeed, I am again distressed and I sit stupidly inactive, once more I shall burn for a long while as I am driven on by the messengers of death.
Long will my body burn in the intolerable fires of hell. Long will my unruly mind burn in the flame of remorse.
I have found this most rare sphere or weal, I know not how; and shall I with open eyes suffer myself to be borne back to these hells?
My thought cannot grasp it, like one who is driven mad by spells, I know not by whom I am crazed or who possesses me.
My foes, Desire, Hate, and their kindred, are handless and footless, they are neither valiant nor cunning; how can they have enslaved me?
But they dwell in my spirit, and there at their ease smite me. And withal I am not wroth with them, fie on my unseemly long-suffering!
If all gods and mankind were my foes, they could not drag me to the fire of the hell Avīcī;
but into this flame, at the touch whereof not even ashes would remain of Meru, these mighty enemies the Passions hurl me in an instant:
No other foes have life so long as the beginningless, endless, everlasting life of my enemies the Passions.
All beings may be turned by submission to kindness; but these Passions become all the more vexatious by my submission.
Then whilst these everlasting foes, sole source of the birth of the floods of sorrow, are dwelling in my heart, how can I fearlessly rejoice in the life of the flesh?
Whence can I have happiness, if these warders of the prison-house of existence, ay, these torturers of the damned in hell and elsewhere, lodge in the house of my spirit, in the bower of my desire?
Then I will not lay down my burden until these foes be smitten before my eyes. Men of lofty spirit are stirred to wrath against even a mean offender, and sleep not until they have smitten him.
They rage in the forefront of battle, furious, heeding not the anguish of wounds from arrows and javelins, to strike fiercely at the poor creatures doomed by nature to death, and turn not away until they have fulfilled their purpose.
How then, and for what reason, should I, who have set myself to strike down these natural foes, the constant causes of all miseries, sink down in base despair, even for hundreds of disasters?
Men bear on their limbs, like ornaments, meaningless scars gotten from their enemies; why should sufferings overcome me, who am labouring to accomplish a lofty end?
Setting their thoughts upon their mere livelihood, fishers, Chaṇḍālas, husbandmen, and the like bear the miseries of cold, heat, and the rest; why should not I suffer them for the weal of the world?
Ah, when I vowed to deliver all beings within the bounds of space in its ten points from the Passions, I myself had not won deliverance from the Passions.
Knowing not my own measure, I spoke like a madman. Then I will never turn back from smiting the Passions.
I will grapple with them, will wrathfully make war on them all except the passion that makes for the destruction of the Passions.
Although my bowels ooze out and my head falls, I will not bow before my everlasting enemies, the passions.
An enemy, though driven away, may establish himself in another spot, whence he may return with gathered powers; but such is not the way of the enemy Passion.
Where can this dweller in my spirit go when I cast him out; where can he stand, to labour for my destruction? It is only that I – fool that I am – make no effort; the miserable Passions are to be overcome by the vision of wisdom.
The Passions lie not in the objects of sense, nor in the sense-organs, nor between them, nor elsewhere; where do they lie? And yet they disturb the whole world! They are but a phantom. Then cast away thy heart’s terror, and labour for wisdom; why shouldst thou vainly torture thyself in hell?
Thus resolved, I will strive to fulfil the rule as it has been taught; how should he who needs medicine find healing, if he departs from the physician’s command?
Chapter IV: Heedfulness in the Thought of Enlightenment
He who would keep the rules must diligently guard his thought; the rules cannot be kept by him who guards not the fickle thought.
Untamed elephants in their madness do not such harm here as the thought works in Avīchī and the rest of the hells, a young elephant ranging free.
But if the young elephant of thought be entirely bound by the rope of remembrance, all peril departs, and perfect happiness comes.
Tigers, lions, elephants, bears, snakes, all foes, all the warders of the hells, witches and devils –
all of them are bound, if only thought be bound; all are subdued if only thought be subdued.
The Speaker of the Truth has said that from thought alone come all our countless terrors and griefs.
Who has diligently forged the swords of hell, or its pavement of red-hot iron, and whence were born its sirens?
All this has sprung from the sinful thought, as the Saint’s song tells; thus in the threefold world there is no foe to fear save the thought.
If the Perfect Charity frees the world from poverty, how could the Saviours of old have had it, since the world is still poor?
The Perfect Charity is declared to be the thought of surrendering to all beings our whole possessions and likewise the merit thereof; thus it is but a thought.
Where can fishes and other creatures be brought into safety, that I may not slay them? When the thought to do them no hurt is conceived, that is deemed the Perfect Conduct.
How many can I slay of the wicked, who are measureless as space? But when the thought of wrath is slain, all my foes are slain.
Whence can be found leather enough to cover the whole earth? But with a single leather shoe the whole ground is covered.
In like manner the forces without me I cannot control; but I will control the thought within me, and what need have I for control of the rest?
Though aided by voice and body, indolence can never win for its prize an estate such as that of Brahmā, which falls to the lot of the vigorous unaided thought.
The prayers and mortifications of a heedless and feeble man, however long he labour, are all in vain, says the Omniscient.
To overcome sorrow and win happiness men wander in vain, for they have not sanctified their thought, the mysterious essence of holiness.
Then I must keep my thought well governed and well guarded; what need is there of any vows save the vow to guard the thought?
As one standing in the midst of a crowd carefully protects a wound, so one standing in the midst of evil persons always should protect the mind as an open wound.
Afraid of experiencing pain in a wound, I carefully protect that wound. Afraid of being caught between the crushing mountains of hell, why should I not protect the mind as if it were a wound?
What of an ascetic living a blameless way of life, even among rogues or even in the midst of wanton women? He does not interrupt his constancy.
Let my possessions be lost – love, respect, the life of the body. Let any other happiness be lost to me, but never [mastery of] the mind.
For those desiring to protect the mind, I fold my hands in prayer: With all zeal protect both mindfulness and total awareness.
As a man troubled by disease is not capable of any action, so likewise with regard to these virtues, the troubled mind is incapable of any action.
When practiced by the mind without total awareness, instruction and reflection escape from mindfulness like water from a leaking jar.
Many who have been instructed, who are faithful and intent upon zeal, become sinful and impure because of a lack of awareness.
The thief Heedlessness, waiting to escape the eye of remembrance, robs men of the righteousness they have gathered, and they come to an evil lot.
The Passions, a band of robbers, seek a lodging, and when they have found it they rob us and destroy our good estate of life.
Then let remembrance never withdraw from the portal of the spirit; and if it departs, let it be brought back by remembering the anguish of hell.
Remembrance grows easily in happy obedient souls from the reverence raised by their teachers’ lore and from dwelling with their masters.
“The Enlightened and their Sons keep unfailing watch in every place. Everything is before them, I stand in their presence.”
Pondering this thought, a man will be possessed by modesty, obedience, and reverence, and the remembrance of the Enlightened will thus be always with him.
When remembrance stands on guard at the portal of the spirit, watchfulness comes, and nevermore departs.
The thought thus must be kept ever under watch; I must always be as if without carnal sense, like a thing of wood.
The eyes must never glance around without object; their gaze should always be ownward, as if in meditation.
But sometimes, to rest his gaze, one may look around him, he sees [strangers] as mere phantoms, but will turn his eyes upon them to bid them welcome.
On the road, and other such places, he will look from time to time to the four quarters of space, to take note of danger; he will rest and turn round to look about him.
He will go forward or backward with heed, and in all conditions do what he has to do with understanding.
In every act that he undertakes he will consider the due posture of his body, and from time to time will look to see how it is.
He will watch with great heed the wild elephant of his thought, so that it remain bound to the stout stake of holy meditation and become not loosed.
He will watch to see where his mind is moving, so that it may not even for an instant cast off the yoke of rapt devotion.
Although one is powerless to act for the best when bound by fear, agitation, and so forth, still, on an occasion of charity, the overlooking of conventional morality is advised.
Whoever, having been enlightened, commences to act, ought to think of nothing else. Insofar as this can be accomplished it is by means of applying one’s entire being.
This way, everything is well done. Otherwise, both [of the conflicting interests of dāna and śīla] may not be achieved. And the flaw of non-awareness will attain further development.
My desire is gone, because of destroying manifold chatterings, frequent turnings, all curiosities.
One ought to reject useless scratching, fidgeting, puttering, once having learned the discipline of the Tathāgatha and having feared it.
If one should desire to move, or desire to speak, his mind is to be examined and suitably composed with patience.
If one would see his mind disciplined and blunted, then he should not act nor speak. He should remain like a piece of wood.
If the mind should be arrogant or sarcastic, brutal because of prideful infatuation, scornful and abusive, crooked and deceiving;
if appearing conceited with one’s self and thus of the utmost contempt; taunting and angry: one should remain like a piece of wood.
The mind is [important] to me [only] for the sake of wealth, praise, glory; for the sake of retinue; and, again, for the sake of homage. Therefore, I remain like a stick of wood.
Being devoted to self-interest, my mind is cruelly opposed to the interest of others; but it is desirous of company, and it likes to talk. Therefore, I remain like a stick of wood.
It is without endurance, without energy, fearful, arrogant, and yet intent upon the welfare of its own kind. Therefore, I remain like a stick of wood.
When the mind is seen to be troubled, or attempting that which is fruitless, the hero ought always to restrain it firmly by means of the opposite behaviour.
Resolved, serene, firm, respectful to whatever relates to the master, with shame, with fear, mild, having as the highest object the satisfaction of others;
unwearied by the contradictory desires of the childish; but instead, full of pity for them, because this is from the arising of passion;
always submissive to one’s own will or to that of other creatures, in suitable circumstances; like a magical creation, without an opinion: Thus I bear whatever relates to the mind.
Having remembered the unique moment, obtained after a long time, having remembered again and again, I make the mind as firm in appearance as Mount Sumeru.
When the body is dragged hither and thither by vultures lusting for meat, why is it powerless to save itself.
Why dost thou watch over this frame, O my spirit, as if it were thine own? if it is a thing apart from thee, what canst thou lose thereby?
Silly one, what thou claimest as thine is not as clean as a wooden doll; why doest thou cling to this rotten machine framed in foulness?
Lift in thy imagination this envelope of skin, and with the scalpel of wisdom remove the flesh from the frame of bones.
Open likewise the bones, and look upon the marrow within them. Then ask thyself what essential thing is therein.
And now that thou hast made diligent search and found therein nothing essential, say wherefore thou still clingest to the body.
Thou canst not eat its impurities and entrails, nor drink its blood; what wilt thou do with the body?
This poor flesh, which thou guardest in order to feed vultures, jackals, and the like, is fitted only to be a tool for men’s works.
Though thou guardest it thus, pitiless Death will tear away the body and give it to the vultures; and the what wilt thou do?
To a servant who will not remain, gifts or garments and the like are not given; when it has eaten, the body will depart, then why waste thy riches upon it?
Pay to it its wage, then set thy thought upon thine own business; for we give not to the hireling all that he may earn.
Conceive of the body as a ship that travels to and fro, and make it go at thy bidding for creatures to fulfil their end.
He who is thus master of himself will ever bear a smiling face; he will put away frowns and be first to greet others, a friend of the world.
He will not noisily and hastily throw down benches or the like nor beat upon a door, but always will delight in silence.
The crane, the cat, and the thief walk silently and calmly, and accomplish the end that they desire; thus the holy man will always act.
He will accept with bowed head the words of those who are skilful in exhorting others and do kindness unsought; he will ever be the disciple of all men.
He will give applause to all kindly words; when he sees one who does righteous works, he will gladden him with praises.
One should discuss the virtues of others in private and repeat them with satisfaction; but when one’s own praiseworthy character is mentioned, that should be considered as an appreciation of virtue in itself.
All achievement is for the sake of satisfaction, but even with money it is hard to grasp. I shall enjoy satisfaction only insofar as it is derived from the virtues achieved by the hard work of others.
In this way, no loss occurs to me, and hereafter there is great joy. But if one yielded to hatreds there would be the unpleasantness of hatreds here and great sorrow hereafter.
One should speak boldly directed sentences for the sake of clarity, which are pleasing to the mind, gratifying to the hearing, filled with compassion, and of a soft and gentle tone.
With the eye one should look honestly at beings, as if drinking together. Thus, by taking refuge with them I shall achieve Buddhahood.
Whether one experiences constancy and devotion, or hostility— whether one experiences happiness or sorrow—great good may ensue.
One should be clever, endowed with energy, and always self-reliant. There is to be no dependence upon anyone in any act.
The Perfections, Charity, and the rest, are of an ascending order of excellence; he will not forsake a more excellent for another, save in respect of the dyke of virtue.
Thus minded, he will be always active for the welfare of others; even a forbidden deed is permitted to him in his kindliness, if he foresees a good result.
He will give of his alms to the fallen, the masterless, and the religious, and eat himself but a moderate portion; he will surrender everything but his three robes.
He will not for slight purpose afflict his body, which is in the service of the Good Law; for thus it will speedily fulfil the desires of living beings.
And therefore he will not cast away his life for one whose spirit of mercy is impure, but only for one whose spirit is like his own; and thus naught is lost.
One should not speak the doctrine to a person without dignity, or who [thinks himself] self-sufficient, or who wears a turban; and not to an [arrogant] person with an umbrella, a rod, or a sword, or whose head is covered.
The profound and exalted should not be spoken to the vulgar, nor to women without a man present. One should bring equal respect to the inferior and the superior Dharma [Hīnayāna and Mahāyāna];
but one ought not to yoke to the inferior Dharma that which is appropriate to the superior Dharma; and having forsaken good conduct, one ought not to deceive with scriptures and spells.
The display of a toothpick, the emission of snot, is not approved; and, also, urine and the like is forbidden in usable water and on good earth.
One ought not to eat with the mouth full, with noise, or with the mouth open. The foot ought not to be pendant, nor should one fold the arms together.
One ought not to take a journey lying down or sitting with another’s woman. Having seen and investigated all that is disapproved by the world, he should avoid it.
One ought not to use a finger to point. Rather—respectfully—he ought to use his full right hand even if he should point out a road.
One ought not to make noise, throwing his arms about; but when one is a trifle hurried a snap of the fingers may be made. Otherwise one might be uncontrolled.
One ought to lie on a couch like the Lord in Nirvāṇa, facing the proper direction, thoughtful, and quick to arise according to command.
The rule of conduct taught by the Bodhisattvas is immeasurable; but one should always practice that conduct which leads to the purification of the mind.
Three times by night and by day one should utilize the three “heaps of merit”. By means of this, and by taking refuge in the Conquerors and in the Thought of Enlightenment, the rest of one’s faults are quieted.
Whatever circumstances one may experience, either caused by himself or by others, he zealously should practice whatever rules apply just then.
There is nothing, once they accept the discipline, which is not to be understood by the sons of the Conqueror. There is nothing which exists which is without merit to such a one.
Both directly and indirectly one must act only for the welfare of sentient beings. One should bend everything to their welfare and to their Enlightenment.
One should never abandon, even for the sake of one’s life, a good friend who holds to the law of the Bodhisattva and who is skilled in the ways of the Mahāyāna.
As indicated by the Śrīsaṃbhavavimokṣa, one ought to practice whatever is taught by the masters. From the recitation of sūtras, both this one and others, that which has been spoken by the Buddha is to be known.
The rules are seen in the sūtras. Because of this, one should recite the sūtras. And in the Ākāśagarbhasūtra one should examine the root sins.
The Śikṣāsamuccaya certainly is to be looked at again and again, because good conduct is explained there in detail.
Or else, in the meantime, one should consult the Sūtrasammucaya, as a compendium; and [its] companion composed by the noble Nāgārjuna [should be studied] zealously.
After you have learned in the discipline wherein you are prohibited and wherein you are commanded, you ought to act for the purpose of protecting the mind in all situations.
This, then, in brief, is the mark of total awareness: the continual examination of the state of one’s body and of one’s mind.
Thus I read with the body, but what good is speaking and reading? What good is a mere medical treatise to the sick?
Chapter V: Watchfulness
All the righteousness, the charity, the worship of the Blessed, that have been wrought in thousands of aeons, are destroyed by ill-will.
There is no guilt equal to hatred, no mortification equal to long-suffering; and therefore one should diligently practice patience in diverse ways.
While the arrow of hate is in the heart, none can have a peaceful mind in equipoise, or feel the joy of kindliness, none can win sleep or calm.
They whom a master cursed with an evil spirit honours with wealth and favours, and who dwell under his protection, seek nevertheless to destroy him.
Even his friends are in terror of him. His gifts win for him no service. In short, there is no way for a passionate man to find happiness.
He who stoutly fights against wrath, the enemy that brings these and other sorrows, wins joy in this world and beyond.
Nourished by discontent, hatred grows swollen and destroys me; and discontent springs from doing unpleasing works or from the baffling of desire.
Then I will cut off the nourishment of my enemy, for this foeman’s sole purpose is to slay me.
My cheerfulness shall not be disturbed, even by the most untoward events; discontent works no good, and only destroys merit.
What profits discontent if there is a remedy; and what profits it if there is none?
We shrink from sorrow, defeat, rude speech, and dishonour for ourselves and our friends, and from the opposite of these for our enemy.
Happiness is hard to win, pain comes readily; there is no escape from life save by pain; then be firm, O my spirit!
The Karṇāṭas, the “little children of Durgā,” suffer the agonies of burning and maiming in a vain hope of salvation; why then shall I be faint-hearted?
There is nothing which practice cannot make easy; so by practice in slight sufferings we learn to bear great pains.
Flies, stinging creatures, gnats, hunger, thirst, and other like pains, fierce itch and other like miseries—lookest thou upon these as profitless?
Before cold, heat, rain, wind, travel, sickness, bondage, and blows be not tender and delicate, else thy anguish will increase.
Some there are who at the sight of their own blood become exceedingly valorous, and some at sight of others’ blood fall into faintness.
This comes about through firmness and feebleness of spirit; then he who is unconquerable by pain will overcome suffering.
Even in pain the wise man will not let the calm of his spirit be disturbed; for he is at war with the Passions, and in war suffering abounds.
They who overcome their foes by presenting their bosoms to the enemy’s blows are “victors,” “heroes”; the rest are “slayers of the slain.”
Another virtue of suffering is that from loathing of the flesh pride is brought low, and there arise pity for the creatures wandering through births, fear of sin, and love for the Conqueror.
I have no anger against the fall and the rest of my humours, although they cause great suffering, then can one be wroth against thinking beings, who likewise are deranged by outer forces?
As a bodily pain arises unwilled [by the humours], so too wrath perforce arises unwilled [in the offender].
A man does not become angry of his free will and with purpose of anger; nor does wrath resolve of itself to break forth before it breaks forth.
All offences, all the various sins, spring of necessity from outer forces; none are self-guided.
The total of outer forces has no consciousness that it engenders an effect, and the effect has no consciousness that it is engendered.
The “Primal Matter” and “Soul” of which forsooth men talk are imaginations. They do not come into being with consciousness of doing so.
Before coming into being they do not exist; and who can then desire to come into being? If the “soul” is active upon its objects, it will not cease thence;
and if it is constant, impassive, and like the ether, it is manifestly inactive; for though it be joined to outer forces, how can a changeless thing act?
What part of the action is done by a thing which at the time of action of the same as before it? If “its own action” is the bond [between soul and object], what is the ground of this?
Thus everything depends of a cause, and this cause likewise is not independent; in no wise, then, can wrath be felt against beings mechanical as phantoms.
“Then there can be no restraint; what is to be arrested, and who shall arrest it?” Not so; for since all is really the work of outer forces, hence we deem that sorrow may have an end.
So when we see a foe, or even a friend, doing unrighteously, let us remember that such are the outer forces moving him, and remain in peace.
If all mortals could win their ends at their own pleasure, none would suffer vexation; for none desire it.
In heedlessness, wrath, or lust for women and other things beyond their reach, men bring themselves into distress from thorns, lack of food, and the like.
Some destroy themselves by hanging, springing down from a height, taking poison or unwholesome measure of food, or doing unrighteousness.
Since under the sway of the passions they harm thus their own persons, which they love, how can they spare the bodies of others?
Maddened by passions, striving for their own destruction, there can be only pity for them; how should we be angered?
If it is the nature of fools to hurt their fellows, it is as wrong for me to feel anger against them as it is to be wroth with the fire which naturally burns me;
and if again it is a passing frailty, and creatures are upright of nature, then it is as wrong to be angered against them as against the air when smoke fills it.
Say I am angered not against the instrument—the stick or whatso it may be—but against him who moves it. But he is moved by hatred; it is better then for me to hate hatred.
I myself in former times have wrought the same suffering for other creatures; then I deserve this for having done hurt to living beings.
The cause of my suffering is twofold—my enemy’s sword and my body. He has taken the sword, I the body; with which shall I be angry?
What I have got is an ulcer in the shape of a body, unable to bear the touch; and thus tortured in the blindness of desire, with what shall I be wroth?
I seek not suffering, yet in my folly seek the cause of suffering; since my pain comes from my own offence, why shall I be wroth with another?
The forest whose leaves are swords, the birds of hell, spring from my own works; with whom then shall I be wroth?
They who do me hurt are moved thereto by my works, and thence they fall into hell; surely it is I that undo them!
Thanks to them, my guilt through much patience fades away; thanks to me, they go to the long agonies of hell.
It is I who do them hurt, they who do me kindness; base-spirited fellow, wherefore this absurd anger?
If I fall not into hell, it will be by the merit of my spirit; what matter is it to them that I save myself?
If I should return them evil for evil, they would not be saved thereby; my progress would be wrecked; and these poor creatures would be lost.
In no place and by naught can the mind be destroyed, for it is unembodied; but from imaginations clinging to the body it suffers with the body’s hurt.
Discomfiture, rude speech, dishonour, all these things harm not the body; then why art thou wroth, O my spirit?
Can the ill-will of others towards me touch me in this life or in births to come, that I should mislike it?
Haply I may mislike it because it hinders me from gaining alms; but then the alms that I get will vanish here, my guilt will stay with me for ever.
Better for me to die this same day than to live long in sin, for however long I stay, the same death-agony awaits me.
One man in dreams enjoys a hundred years of bliss, and awakes; another is happy for an hour, and awakes;
surely the pleasure of both, when they wake, is alike ended. And so it is at the time of death with the long-lived and the short-lived.
Though I may get many gifts, and long enjoy my pleasures, I shall depart empty-handed and naked, as if stripped by robbers.
“By my gains I may live to wipe out my sin and do righteousness”—ay, but he who is angry for the sake of gain wipes out his righteousness and does sin.
If that for which I live is lost, what profits life itself which is spent wholly in ungodliness?
“I hate him who speaks to my blame, for he brings creatures to destruction”—then why art thou not angry against him who rails at others?
Thou bearest with the unkindly when their unkindness touches others, and bearest not with the caviller who touches on the growth of thy vices!
It is unfit for me to hate them that destroy or revile images, sanctuaries, or the Good Law; for the Enlightened and their company thereby take no hurt.
If men wrong thy dear ones, masters, brothers, and the rest, know as before that outer forces are working, and restrain thy wrath.
Whether it be wrought by a thing with or without thought, suffering is assured to living beings; it is found in whatever has thought; then bear with it.
Some in their blindness do wrong, others in their blindness are wroth with them; whom of these may we call blameless, or whom guilty?
Why hast thou of old done so that thou art thus afflicted now by others? All are under the sway of their own works; who am I to undo this?
Knowing this, I will strive to do righteousness, so that all may be full of love for one another.
When a house is burning, and the fire may fall upon the next house and seize upon the straw and like stuff within it, we carry this stuff away from it;
and in like manner must we straightway cast out the things by touch whereof the spirit is inflamed with the fire of wrath, for fear lest the substance of our merit be consumed.
If a man doomed to death be released with one hand cut off, is it not well for him? and if one through human tribulations escapes hell, is it not also well for him?
If one cannot bear the small suffering of the moment, then why does he not put away the wrath that will bring upon him the agonies of hell?
By reason of wrath I have been thus afflicted in hell thousands of times, and done no service to myself or to others.
My present tribulation is not so heavy, and will be very gainfull; let me be glad of a suffering that redeems the world from its suffering.
If some find delight in praising one of high worth, why, O my spirit, dost thou not rejoice likewise in praising him?
Such joy will bring thee no blame; it will be a fountain of happiness; it is not forbidden by men of worth; it is the noblest way to win over thy fellows.
If thou art not pleased because he [who praises] is glad, then thou wouldst forbid such things as payment for service, and seen and unseen rewards alike perish.
Thou art willing for thy neighbour to be glad when he praises thy worth; but thou art loth to be thyself glad when another’s worth is praised.
Thou hast framed the Thought of Enlightenment in desire to make all creatures happy; then why now art thou wroth with creatures who of themselves find happiness?
Forsooth thou wouldst have all beings become Buddhas, and worthy of the three worlds’ worship; then why art thou vexed to see their brief honours?
He who nurtures them that thou shouldst nurture gives to thee; yet when thou findest one that feeds thy household, thou art wroth, not glad!
He that desires the enlightenment of living beings desires all good for them; but whence can one have the Thought of Enlightenment who is angered at another’s good fortune?
If the gift comes not to thy neighbour, it stays in the house of the offerer; in no wise does it fall to thee; what matter to thee whether it be given or no?
Shall he check his righteousness, the kindness of others, or his own worth? shall he not take what is given? say, art thou not angered in every case?
Not only wilt thou not grieve for thine own sins, but thou darest to be jealous of the righteous.

If sorrow could befall thine enemy at thy pleasure, what would come of it? Thy mere ill-will cannot bring forth an issue without a cause;
but if it were accomplished by thy wish, what happiness wouldst thou have in his grief? The issue then would be more harmful to thee than aught else.
This is in sooth a deadly hook in the hands of the fisher Passion; the wardens of hell will take thee thence in purchase and seethe thee in their kitchens.
Praise, glory, and honours make not for righteousness or long life, or for strength, or health, or pleasure of the body.
But such will be the end sought by a wise man knowing his advantage; and he who desires mirth of spirit may give himself to drink, gambling, and the like.
For glory men waste their substance, ay, even their lives. But will syllables feed them? and when they are dead, who has pleasure of it?
As a child wails bitterly when its house of sand is broken down, so I deem my own spirit will be when praise and glory vanish.
Praise is but sound, and being itself without thought, cannot praise me. “Nay, I am glad, forsooth, because my neighbour is pleased with me.”
But what is it to me whether my neighbour is pleased with me or with another? the joy is his; not the smallest share of it is mine.
If happiness springs from the joy of others, then I should have it in every event; so why am I not glad when men rejoice to honour another?
Then gladness arises within me only because I am praised; and thus, being foreign to myself, it is an utter child’s play.
These praises and honours destroy my welfare and horror of the flesh; they arouse envy of the worthy and anger at their fortune.
Then they who rise against me to crush my glory and honour are in truth working to save me from falling into hell.
If I seek deliverance, gains and honours are a fetter that befit me not; how can I hate them that release me from this bond?
By the blessing of the Enlightened, as it were, they become a door barring my way into sorrow; how can I hate them?
“But he hinders me from righteous works”—nay, it is not well to be angry for this. There is no work of mortification equal to long-suffering, and surely this is an occasion for it.
If by my sin here I show not patience towards him, it is I who hinder myself from doing righteous when the occasion for it has come.
If one thing exists not without another, and exists when the other is present, the latter is the cause of the former: how can it be called a hindrance to it?
The beggar who comes at the due hour makes no hindrance to the almsgiving; and if a monk comes who can administer the vows, it is not called a hindrance to our taking of the vows.
We find many beggars in the world, but few who will do us hurt; for if I do no wrong, no man will wrong me.
Then an enemy is like a treasure found in my house, won without labour of mine; I must cherish him, for he is a helper in the way to Enlightenment.
Thus this fruit of my patience is won by me and by him together; to him must be given the first share, for he is the cause of my patience.
“But my enemy seeks not to prosper my patience, and therefore he is not worthy of honour”—nay, why then do we honour the Good Law, the unconscious cause of blessing?
“Nay, his purpose is to do me hurt”—but if an enemy is therefore not honoured, how can I otherwise show patience towards him, as though he were intent, like a physician, on my welfare?
It is by reason of his evil design that my patience is born; therefore he is the cause of patience, and as worthy of honour from the as the Good Law.
Therefore the Saint has told of the Domain of Creatures and the Domain of Conquerors; for by seeking the favour of creatures and Conquerors many have risen to supreme fortune.
Since with both creatures and Conquerors is the same gift of the qualities of the Enlightened, how may we deal partially and refuse to creatures the reverence shown to Conquerors?
The greatness of the purpose lies not in itself, but in its works; hence creatures have a like greatness, and therein they are like [to the Enlightened].
The greatness of creatures is that he who has the spirit of kindliness towards them wins worship; the greatness of the Enlightened is that merit is won by love toward them.
Thus creatures are like to the Conquerors by giving in part the dower of the qualities of the Enlightened, albeit none of them are peer to the Enlightened, who are oceans of virtues, infinite of parts;
and if even one atom-small virtue from these sole stores of the essence of the virtues be found in any creature, the whole threefold world is not enough for his worship.
In creatures is found a little power, but that most noble, for bringing forth the qualities of the Enlightened; according to that little power should creatures be honoured.
Moreover, what perfect reparation can be made to these Kinsmen without guile, these doers of immeasurable kindness, save the service of creatures?
They tear their own bodies, they go down into the hell Avīchī, all for the welfare of others; then even to them who most sorely wrong us we must do all manner of good.
How dare I show pride, instead of a slave’s humbleness, towards those masters for whose sake my Masters are heedless of their own lives?
When they are happy, the Saints are rejoiced, and wroth when they are distressed; in their gladness is the gladness of all the Saints; when they are wronged, wrong is done to the Saints.
As one whose body is entirely in flame finds no comfort in any things of desire, so when creatures are distressed these beings of mercy have no way to find pleasure.
Forasmuch then as I have done hurt to all these most compassionate beings by doing hurt to living things, I confess now my sin; may the Saints pardon me for the wrong that I have done to them!
To win the grace of the Blessed Ones to-day I make myself utterly the slave of the world. Let the crowds of living beings set their feet upon my head or smite me, and the Lord of the World be glad!
Beyond all doubt these Merciful Ones have made the whole universe their own; truly it is our Lords who show themselves in the form of creatures, and dare we despise them?
It is this that moves the Blessed to grace, this that wins my true end, this that wipes away the misery of the world; then be this my vow!
A single henchman of the king handles a crowd rudely; and the throng, looking on from afar, dares not show sign of passion;
for he is not alone, the king’s power is his strength. And likewise thou mayst not dishonour him who wrongs thee because he is weak;
for the warders of hell and the Merciful Ones are his strength. Then let us seek the favour of creatures, as a servant the favour of a wrathful king.
Can a king in his anger bring upon us the anguish of hell, which we shall bear for making creatures sorrowful?
Can a king in his pleasure bestow aught equal to Enlightenment, which we shall bear for making creatures happy?
But beside the destined Enlightenment that springs from kindness to creatures, seest thou not that herein lie fortune, glory, comfort?
Favour, health, joy, long life, and abounding delight of empire fall to the lot of the patient man in the course of his lives.
Chapter VI: The Perfect Long-suffering
Now he who is patient will seek for strength, for in strength lies Enlightenment. Without strength there is no righteous work, as without the wind, there is no motion.
And what is strength? Vigour in well-doing. What is its contrary called? Faintness, clinging to base things, despair, self-contempt.
From inaction, delight in pleasure, slumber, and eagerness for repose springs a spirit that feels no horror at the miseries of life, and from this arises faintness.
Pursued by the Passions, those fishers, thou hast come into the net of Birth, and knowest thou not that this selfsame day thou hast fallen into the jaws of Death?
Seest thou not thy comrades smitten down one after the other? and withal thou fallest into slumber like a bullock in the butcher’s hands.
Watched by the Death-god, thy ways hemmed in on every side, how canst thou find delight in food, how canst thou sleep and love?
Wait a little while, until Death shall have gathered his instruments, and he will come swiftly upon thee; then it will be an ill time for thee to cast off thy faintness, and what wilt thou do?
“This work untouched, this begun, this standing half-done—and lo! Death has suddenly fallen upon me! Alas I am undone!”
Such will be thy thoughts, whilst thou lookest upon thy despairing kinsmen with their eyes swollen and red with tears in the passion of their grief, and upon the faces of the Death-god’s messengers,
whilst thou liest racked by the memory of thy sins, hearing the noises of hell, altogether overwhelmed—and oh, what wilt thou do?
It is well for thee to think fearfully of thyself here as of a living fish, much more so for the sinner to dread the fierce anguish of hell.
Thou art burnt if warm water touch thee, tender creature that thou art; and when thou doest damnable sins, how canst thou sit thus comfortably?
O wreched soul, that longest for reward unearned by striving, thou that art so tender and much afflicted, thou immortal, thou art devoured by Death, and undone!
Thou hast found the ship of manhood; then sail in it across the broad river of sorrow. Fool, this is no time for slumber; it will be hard to find the ship again.
How canst thou forsake the noble delight in the Law, which brings an endless course of comforts, and find pleasure in wantonness, mirth, and other like sources of sorrow?
The spirit that knows not despair, the troops of the Army, devoted heed, self-submission, equal esteem of self and others, and regard of others in place of self [are the supports of strength].
Let me not despair that the Enlightenment will come to me; for the Blessed One, the speaker of truth, has revealed this truth,
that they who by force of striving have gained hard-won supreme Enlightenment have been erstwhile gnats, gadflies, flies, and worms.
Now I am a man by birth, able to know good and evil: why shall I not win the Enlightenment by following the rule of the All-knowing?
If I am afraid when I think that I must give my hand and foot, it is because in my heedlessness I confound things of great and of small weight.
I may be cleft, pierced, burnt, split open many and many a time for countless millions of aeons, and never win the Enlightenment.
But this pain that wins me the Enlightenment is of a brief term; it is like the pain of cutting out a buried arrow to heal its smart.
All physicians restore health by painful courses; then to undo much suffering let us bear a little.
But even this fitting course the Great Physician has not enjoined upon us; he heals them that are grievously sick by tender treatment.
At first our Lord ordains gifts only of herbs and the like, and then in due course brings men at last to surrender even their own flesh.
When there comes to man the spirit that looks upon his flesh as no more than herbs, what hardship is it for him to surrender his flesh and bone?
He is not hurt, for he has cast off sin, nor sad, for knowledge is his; for distress comes in the mind from false imaginations, and in the body from sin.
The body is made happy by righteous works, the spirit by knowledge; what can vex the compassionate one who remains in embodied life only for the welfare of others?
Annulling his former sins, amassing oceans of righteousness, by the power of his Thought of Enlightenment he travels more swiftly than the Disciples.
Having thus in the Thought of Enlightenment a chariot that removes all vexation and weariness, travelling from happiness to happiness, who that is wise will despair?
To accomplish the welfare of his fellow-creatures he has an Army, the troops of which are Love of Right, Constancy, Joy, and Abandonment. The Love of Right he will frame from the fear of suffering and from pondering upon merits.
when he has uprooted his foes, he will strive for increase of vigour by means of his armies, which are the love of right, pride, joy, abandonment, devoted heed, and self-submission.
Countless are the faults in myself and my fellows that I shall have to destroy, and hundreds of thousands of aeons must pass ere even one of these fade away.
But I find not in myself the least morsel of vigour to set myself to undo these faults; I am doomed to boundless anguish, and why does my bosom not burst?
Many are the virtues in myself and my fellows that must be gained, and hundreds of thousands of aeons will scarce be enough for the practice of even one of them.
But I have never practised the least morsel of virtue; to no purpose has been spent the birth so hardly and marvellously won.
The joy of the great festivals in worship of the Lord has not been mine; I have done no honour to the Law, nor fulfilled the desire of the poor;
I have not given security to them that are in fear, nor happiness to the afflicted; I have been only a vexation of my mother’s womb, to work sorrow.
Because of old I departed from the love of right, I am not in this evil plight; who would forsake the love of right?
This love the Saint has proclaimed to be the root of all righteous works; and its root is the constant meditation upon the fruit that grows from deeds.
Manifold are the pains, the sorrows, the terrors, and the disappointments that arise to sinners.
Whithersoever the desire of the righteous turns, it is greeted with happy issue, because of their merits;
and whithersoever turns the sinner’s yearning for pleasure, it is smitten with swords of pain, because of his sins.
They that are godly of works enter the wombs of broad, sweet-smelling, cool lotus-blossoms; their lustrous forms grow nurtured by the Conqueror’s sweet melody; then they issue in comely beauty from the lotus-flowers awakened by the sunbeams of the Holy One, and are born as sons of the Blessed in the presence of the Blessed.
As to them that are flayed of their whole skin by the Death-god’s henchmen, their bodies bathed with copper molten in the fire, their flesh cut off in gobbets by hundreds of blows from flaming swords and pikes, and they fall again and again upon beds of red-hot iron.
Then let the love of righteousness be with you, and be heedful thus to foster it. In setting his hand to work one should foster pride, according to the rule of the Varja-dhvaja Sūtra.
When he has first considered the sum of circumstances, he will either begin it, or not begin it; for it is better not to begin at all than to leave undone what has been begun.
For this practice will last even into other births, and from such sin will arise abounding sorrow; and not only is the present work not accomplished, but likewise others that might be done in the same time come not to pass.
In respect of three things may pride be borne—man’s works, his temptations, and his power. The pride or works lies in the thought “for me alone is the task.”
This world, enslaved by passion, is powerless to accomplish its own weal; then I must do it for them, for I am not impotent like them.
Shall another do a lowly task while I am standing by? If I in my pride will not do it, better it is that my pride perish.
The very crow becomes a Garuḍa when he lights upon a dead lizard; if my spirit is feeble, the least occasion of sin will overcome me.
To him who is palsied by a faint hear occasions of sin come abundantly; but he who has a noble pride ever alert is unconquerable even by great temptations.
Then with firm spirit I will undo the occasions of undoing; if I should be conquered by them, my ambition to conquer the threefold world would be a jest.
I will conquer all; none shall conquer me. This is the pride that I will bear, for I am the son of the conqueror-Lions.
Creatures who are overcome by arrogance bear the title of misery, not of pride; he that is proud falls not into the power of the foe, but they are slaves to the foe Arrogance.
Through arrogance they are brought into evil estate, and even in human birth lose their joys, eating the bread of others, slaves, fools, uncomely, wasted away;
despised on all sides are the wretched stiff in arrogance; if they are ranked with the proud, say, who are the miserable?
Proud, victorious, heroic are they who set their pride on conquest of the foe Arrogance, who overthrow him in all his might, and freely show to the world the fruit of their conquest.
Surrounded by the troop of the Passions, a man should become a thousand times prouder, and be as unconquerable to their hordes as a lion to flocks of deer.
Even in great stress the eye is unconscious of the sense of taste; and so, into whatever straits he may come, he will not fall into the power of the Passions.
It would be better for me to be burned, to have my head cut off and to be killed, rather then ever bowing down to those ever-present disturbing conceptions. (So likewise in all situations I should do nothing other than what is fit.)
He will utterly give himself over to whatever task arrives, greedy for the work, insatiate of spirit, like one who lusts for the delight issuing from his sport.
Every work is done for the sake of happiness, whether the happiness come or no; but how can he whose happiness is work itself be happy in doing no work?
Desires, like honey on the edge of a razor’s blade, bring no contentment in life; but what satiety can there be from the divine draughts of righteous deeds, that are blessed and sweet in their issue?
Then when one work is brought to an end, he will plunge into another, as the elephant, vexed by the heat of midday, plunges straightway into the lake that he finds.
But when his strength fails, he will withdraw from his work; and if it be happily ended, he will leave it, in eagerness for more and more tasks.
He will guard himself against the blows of the Passions, as though fighting with the sword against a skilful foe.
As one in fear swiftly takes up again a fallen sword, so he will take up the fallen sword of remembrance, bethinking himself of hell.
As poison that has reached the blood spreads through the body, so the sin that finds a weak spot spreads through the spirit.
A man carrying a bowl full of oil, surrounded by soldiers with drawn swords, in fear of death if he should trip, will walk heedfully; and so it is with him that is under the vow.
Then when slumber and faintness fall upon him, he will strive against them as speedily as one springs up when a serpent is creeping into his lap.
Whenever he is caught unawares, he will be sorely grieved, and consider what he should do that it may not befall him again.
For the sake of this he will desire godly company or tasks to come in his way, that his remembrance may be exercised in these conditions.
Remembering the Sermon on heedfulness, he will hold himself in readiness, so that even before a task comes to him he is prepared to turn to every course.
As the seed of the cotton-tree is swayed at the coming and going of the wind, so will he be obedient to his resolution; and thus divine power is gained.
Chapter VII: The Perfect Strength
When thus vigour has been nurtured, it is well to fix the thought in concentred effort; the man of wandering mind lies between the fangs of the Passions.
It cannot wander if body and thought be in solitude; so it is well to forsake the world and put away vain imaginations.
Because of love, or hunger for gain, and the like, men will not forsake the world; then in order to cast it aside the wise will lay to heart these thoughts.
Passion is overcome only by him who has won through stillness of spirit the perfect vision. Knowing this, I must first seek for stillness; it comes through the contentment that is regardless of the world.
What creature of a day should cling to other frail beings, when he can never again through thousands of births behold his beloved?
Yet when he sees him not, he is ill at ease; he rests not in concentred thought; and even when he beholds him he is not satisfied, but is distressed by the same longing as before.
He sees not things in their reality; he loses his horror of the world; he is consumed by his grief in yearning for union with the beloved.
In thoughts thereupon his brief life vainly passes away hour by hour; and the eternal Law is broken for the sake of a short-lived friend!
If he share in the life of the foolish, a man assuredly goes to hell; if he share it not, he wins hatred; what profits it to have commerce with the foolish?
They are friends for a moment, foes for a moment, wrathful when they should be pleased—how hard to content are the worldly!
They are angered if wholesomely counselled, and hold me back from good; if I heed them not they are wroth, and pass into hell.
When can good come of a fool? He is jealous of a better man, contentious with a peer, haughty towards one that is lower, puffed up by praise, angered by blame.
Exaltation of self, blame of others, discourse in praise of worldly pleasure—some such guilt will assuredly come from fool to fool.
Thus it is from the union of one with another; evil thereby meets evil. I will live alone, in peace and untroubled mind.
It is well to flee from the foolish. If he come in thy way, seek to win him over by kindness, not so as to hold commerce with him, but in a manner of godly indifference.
I will take from him only enough for the holy life, as the bee takes honey from the flower; thus in every place I will hold myself from commerce with him, like the new moon.
The mortal who thinks of his gains or his honours or the favour of many men will be afraid of death when it falls upon him.
Whatsoever it be in which the pleasure-crazed spirit takes its delight, that thing becomes a pain a thousand times greater.
Therefore the wise man will seek not for pleasure, for from desire arises terror; and if it come of itself, let him stand firm and wait.
Many there are who have found gain, many who have won fame; but none know whither they have gone, with their gains and their fame.
Some loathe me; then why shall I rejoice in being praised? Some praise me; then why shall I be cast down by blame?
Living beings are of diverse character; not even the Conquerors can content them, much less simple souls such as I. Then why think of the world?
They blame a fellow-creature who gains naught, they scorn him who gains something; being thus by nature unpleasant companions; what happiness can come from them?
The Blessed Ones have said that the fool is no man’s friend; for the fool has no love save where his interest lies.
Trees are not disdainful, and ask for no toilsome wooing; fain would I consort with those sweet companions.
Fain would I dwell in some deserted sanctuary, beneath a tree or in caves, that I might walk without heed, looking never behind!
Fain would I abide in nature’s own spacious and lordless lands, a homeless wanderer free of will,
my sole wealth a clay bowl, my cloak profitless to robbers, fearless and careless of my body!
Fain would I go to my home the graveyard, and compare with other skeletons my own frail body!
for this my body will become so foul that the very jackals will not approach it because of its stench.
The bony members born with this corporeal frame will fall asunder from it, much more so my friends.
Alone man is born, alone he dies; no other share in his sorrows. What avail friends, but to bar his way?
As a wayfarer takes a brief lodging, so he that is travelling through the way of existence finds in each birth but a passing rest.
It is well for a man to depart to the forest ere the four bearers carry him away amidst the laments of his folk.
Free from commerce and hindrance, possessing naught but his body, he has no grief at the hour of death, for already he has died to the world;
no neighbours are there to vex him or disturb his remembrance of the Enlightened and like thoughts.
Then I will ever woo sweet Solitude, untroubled dayspring of bliss, stilling all unrest.
Released from all other thoughts, with mind utterly set upon my own spirit, I will strive to concentre and control my spirit.
The desires beget harm in this world and beyond: here, by bondage, slaughter, and loss of limb; beyond in hell.
That for the sake of which thou hast bowed many a time before bawds, heeding not sin nor infamy,
and cast thyself into peril and wasted thy substance, that which by its embrace has brought thee supreme delight—
it is naught but bones, now free and unpossessed; wilt thou not take thy fill of embraces now, and delight thyself?
This was the face that erstwhile turned downwards in modesty and was unwilling to look up, hidden behind a veil whether eyes gazed upon it or gazed not;
and this face now the vultures unveil to thee, as though they could not bear thy impatience. Look on it—why dost thou flee now from it?
It was this which was protected from even the glance of another’s eye that now is devoured. Why do you not jealously protect it?
After you have seen this mountain of flesh devoured by vultures and other scavengers, you do not honour their food with garlands, sandal, and ornaments?
You are terrified by the sight of this motionless skeleton. Why are you not also afraid of it when it is moved by some demon?
Saliva and excrement are born from the same source—from food! Since excrement is unpleasant to you, how can the drinking of saliva [in a kiss] be so precious?
Those who love have intercourse with mere pillows that are filled with cotton and soft to the touch. Thinking that their emission is not a stench, they are infatuated with excrement.
When it is covered, even this [body] is an object of passion. Why is it not loved when it is uncovered? If the covering is not the object, why is it caressed?
If these two impurities [of bone and of flesh] are not objects of passion for you, why embrace again a cage of bones fastened with sinews and completely smeared with the filth of flesh?
By means of your own great excrement be content! You who are ravenous for feces, forget that other pouch of excrement!
“I love that flesh,” you say. You desire to see and to touch. How can you want flesh when by its nature it is without thought?
That thought which you seek, you are not able to see or to touch; and that which you can touch and see does not realize it. Why then do you embrace in vain?
It is no wonder that you do not realize the body of another to be excrement; but that you do not perceive your own body to be excrement is amazing.
After having renounced the young lotus, radiant with the rays of the sun in a cloudless sky, what joy is there to the mind to be drunk with excrement in a cage of feces?
If you do not wish to touch the earth, and so forth, because it is smeared with excrement, how can you wish to touch that body from which the refuse is cast out?
If you do not have a passion for these two impurities [the body and its refuse], why do you embrace another who is born from a field of excrement, its seed and that by which it grows?
You do not desire the filthy worm which is produced from excrement, because of its minuteness: But you seek that great excrement—the body born of excrement!
Not only do you not detest your own excrement, O ravenous for feces! You desire other vessels of excrement!
When dainty foods, the seasoning of boiled rice, camphor, and so forth, are thrown from the mouth and spit out, even the earth becomes impure.
If you do not admit the excrement [of your own body], although it is before your eyes, then observe the horrible bodies of others who have been thrown into a cemetery.
When the skin splits open great fear arises as a consequence. How indeed can joy ever arise again after one has known what it is like to be in that place?
The perfume which pervades the body [of the corpse] is from sandalwood and not from anything else. Why are you attracted elsewhere because of the perfume belonging to another?
If you foul-smelling person is not an object of passion, is that not indeed propitious? Why does the world, longing for that which is contrary to its welfare, anoint it with perfume?
What then has happened to the body if its pleasant smell is sandalwood? Why are you attracted elsewhere because of the perfume belonging to another?
If the hair and nails are long, the teeth are spotted and yellow, the naked body, covered with dirt, is horrible by nature.
Why do you adore it zealously, providing a sword for self-destruction? The earth is filled with madmen labouring for self-deception.
Having seen many skeletons, you find that a cemetery is disgusting to you: But you delight in a village, which is a cemetery filled with walking skeletons.
And yet even that excrement is not obtained without price: the fatigue of achieving prosperity and the torment which begins in hell.
The child has not the ability to earn: What pleasure is there in youth? Youthfulness passes in earning. Grown old, what is done for pleasure?
Some, who have evil desires, are thoroughly worn-out at the day’s end because of their occupations: Coming home in the evening they lie down as if they were dead.
Others, because of military expeditions, are grieved by the anguish of dwelling abroad: For years they do not see the sons and the wives for whom they long.
Whoever has sold himself for prosperity, because of the infatuation of desire, he has not obtained it: But instead, his life has been led vainly in the service of others.
Their own bodies having been sold, they always are engaged in rendering service, while their wives give birth in forest thickets and such places.
They go into battle at the risk of their lives just in order to live. The bewildered, distorted by desire, go into slavery for the sake of pride.
Some who are victims of desire are thrown on spikes and pierced; others are beheld burning and smitten with swords.
Mark how fortune brings endless misfortunes by the miseries of winning it, guarding it, and losing it; men’s thoughts cling altogether to their riches, so that they have not a moment to free themselves from the sorrows of life.
Thus they who are possessed by desire suffer much and enjoy little, as the ox that drags a cart gets but a morsel of grass.
For the sake of this morsel of enjoyment, which falls easily to the beast’s lot, man blinded by his destiny, wastes this brief fortune, that is so hard to win.
For all time lasts the struggle for the welfare of the mean body that is doomed to depart and fall into hell,
and even a millionth part of this labour would win the rank of the Enlightened. Greater is the pain of them that are possessed by desire than the pain of the way of holiness, and no Enlightenment comes to them.
Neither sword, nor poison, nor fire, nor fall into abysses, nor foemen may be compared to the desires, if we bear in mind the agonies of hell and the like.
Then shrink from the desires, and learn delight in solitude, in the peaceful woodlands void of strife and toil.
Happy are they who are fanned by the sweet silent breezes of the forest, as they walk upon the pleasant rock-floors broad as in a palace and cooled by the moonbeams’ sandal ointment, and take thought for the weal of their fellow-creatures!
Dwelling anywhere for what time they will, in deserted sanctuary, or cave or beneath the trees, saved form the weariness of winning and guarding possessions, they wander fancy-free at pleasure.
Indra himself can hardly win the bliss of contentment that is enjoyed by him who wanders homeless at his own free will and unattached to aught.
By pondering in such wise upon the excellences of solitude a man stills vain imaginations and strengthens his Thought of Enlightenment.
First he will diligently foster the thought that his fellow-creatures are the same as himself. “All have the same sorrows, the same joys as I, and I must guard them like myself.
The body, manifold of parts in its division of members, must be preserved as a whole; and so likewise this manifold universe has its sorrow and its joy in common.
Although my pain may bring no hurt to other bodies, nevertheless it is a pain to me, which I cannot bear because of the love of self;
and though I cannot in myself feel the pain of another, it is a pain to him which he cannot bear because of the love of self.
I must destroy the pain of another as though it were my own, because it is a pain; I must show kindness to others, for they are creatures as I am myself.
Since a neighbour and I are equal in desiring happiness, what is the unique quality of the “self” which requires an effort for happiness?
Since both fear and sorrow are neither desirable to my neighbor nor to me, what is the unique quality of that “self” which I protect instead of him?
Because I am not oppressed by reason of his sorrow, is he not to be protected? Am I not to protect myself from the injury which will come from the sorrow of future bodies?
Surely it is a false calculation to think that there is an “I,” because it is another who has died and it is another who is born.
So if anyone is protected from any sorrow, it is regarded as his own. The sorrow of the foot is not that of the hand, so why is it protected by the hand?
Even if unrelated, it arises from the Ego-maker. Whatever is unrelated, both to one’s self or to another, is to be annulled with all one’s might.
“Continuity” and “aggregate” are like group or an army or such: They are false. There is no “he” of whom there is sorrow; and because of this, whose will be this “his”?
All sorrows, without distinction, are ownerless; and because of misery they are to be prevented. Why then is restriction made?
Why is sorrow to be prevented?—all are without disagreement [on this point]. And if it is to be prevented, then [let it be done] completely. Not just in myself. Everywhere!
If great sorrow is derived from compassion, why allow it to arise against one’s will? After considering the sorrow of the world, how great is the sorrow of the compassionate!
If the sorrow of the many vanishes by the sorrow of the one, then that sorrow ought to arise from pity of one’s self and of others.
In this way his own sorrow was not destroyed by Supuṣpacandra at the sacrifice of the sorrows of many, although he knew the way of the King.
Consequently [the Bodhisattvas, the compassionate], having transformed their mentalities, delighting in the tranquilizing of another’s sorrow, plunge into the Avīcī hell like wild geese into a cluster of lotus.
When beings are delivered it is for them an ocean of joy which overwhelms all: What good is the insipid deliverance [of an Arhat of a Pratyekabuddha]?
After having done something for the benefit of others, let there be neither excitement nor pride nor desire for subsequent merit: Let there be only thirst for the other’s benefit.
Then, as I would guard myself from evil repute, so I will frame a spirit of helpfulness and tenderness towards others.”
By constant use the idea of an “I” attaches itself to foreign drops of seed and blood, although the thing exists not.
Then why should I not conceive my fellow’s body as my own self? That my body is foreign to me is not hard to see.
I will think of myself as a sinner, of others as oceans of virtue; I will cease to live as self, and will take as my self my fellow-creatures.
We love our hands and other limbs, as members of the body; then why not love other living beings, as members of the universe?
By constant use man comes to imagine that his body, which has no self-being, is a “self”; why then should he not conceive his “self” to lie in his fellows also?
Thus in doing service to others pride, admiration, and desire of reward find no place, for thereby we satisfy the wants of our own self.
Then, as thou wouldst guard thyself against suffering and sorrow, so exercise the spirit of helpfulness and tenderness towards the world.
Thus the Lord Avalokita has given his own name to protect a man from even the fear of being timid in the Assembly.
One should not turn from difficulties because of regard for his reputation. One is without rest, protecting that reputation.
Whoever wishes to quickly rescue himself and another should practice the supreme mystery: the exchanging of himself and the other.
Because of excessive attachment to “self,” even the slightest fear causes fear. Who would not hate that “self,” who, like an enemy, is a carrier of fear;
who, desiring a defense against sickness, hunger, thirst, and the like, destroys birds, fish, animals, and stands as their antagonist;
who, for the sake of profit and honour would kill even his parents; who would steal even the Three Jewels, the inheritance which he has received; and who would be fuel for Avīcī:
What wise man would desire that “self”? Who would protect it? Who would worship it? Who would not regard it as an enemy? Who would honour it?
One thinks, “What shall I eat if I make an offering?” For the sake of the “self” he becomes a demon. One thinks, “What shall I give if I eat?” For the sake of another he becomes the King of the Gods.
Having injured another for the sake of the “self,” one is cooked in hell: Having injured himself for the sake of another, he is endowed with all prosperity.
That wish for self-elevation which [creates] an evil destiny, baseness, and stupidity, [creates] a good destiny, honour, and intelligence when one has transferred it elsewhere.
Having ordered another for self-benefit, one experiences slavery: Having ordered himself for the benefit of another, he experiences power, and the like.
All of those who are in a condition of unhappiness in the world are that way because of desiring their own release. All of those who are in a condition of happiness in the world are that way from seeking the release of another.
But why so much speaking? Let that difference be seen which is between the fool who is concerned with his own benefit, and the sage who creates benefit for another.
There is certainly no accomplishment, no Buddhahood, or even happiness in the realms of rebirth, for the one who does not exchange his own happiness for the sorrow of another.
Not even considering the next world, our welfare here does not prosper. The workman does not do that for which he is paid; the master does not give wages to the workman.
After forsaking the origin of mutual happiness (the flowering of happiness whether seen or unseen), the infatuated grasp at terrible sorrow, because sorrow is mutual.
Whatever calamities there are, and whatever sorrows and fears come to the world, they are all the result of attachment to “self.” Why is that attachment mine?
Not having extinguished “self,” one is not able to extinguish sorrow; just as one who has not extinguished a fire is not able to extinguish the burning.
It follows that for the sake of tranquilizing my own sorrow, and for the tranquilizing of the other’s sorrow, I give myself to others and I accept others like myself.
That I am another is certainly well understood: Accept it, O mind! Having cast off all for the sake of beings, nothing else is to be considered by you tomorrow.
It is not suitable to employ sight [and similar faculties] for self-benefit, because the eyes, and so forth, are theirs. It is not suitable to move the hands for self-benefit, because they belong to others.
After giving yourself to other beings, whatever you see in the body which may be applied to the advantage of others, is to be taken away from it.
After establishing “selfhood” in the most lowly, and the stranger in the “self,” both envy and pride may arise without scruple of the mind.
He is honoured: I am not. I am not rich like him. He is praised: I am blamed. I am sorrowful: He is the happy one.
I am engaged in labours, while he remains at ease. He is indeed great in the world: I am indeed base and without virtues.
What can be done by one without virtues? Yet everyone may not be endowed with virtues. There are those to whom I am base: There are those to whom I am superior.
If my conduct or my teaching has fallen into ruin, it is because of the power of passion, not because of my own will. I am to be cured, if it is possible; I have surely accepted the pain.
If I cannot be cured by this [“self”], why does he despise me? What to me are these virtues? Because of such virtues he is endowed with “self.”
Has he only compassion for those men who dwell in the mouths of the beasts of prey in an evil place? In pride of virtue he strives to surpass the distant sages.
Having seen one equal to himself, he must strive for the increase of his own superiority. By quarrelling he is to obtain profit and honour for himself.
May my virtues become manifest everywhere in the world: But whatever virtues he may have, let them not be heard anywhere.
Let my faults be hidden that there may be honour to me, but let there be none for him. Benefits have now been obtained by me: I am honoured, but he is not.
We behold you fully—although it is late—the one who is ill-treated, laughed at by every man, reviled: Thus was he bent down.
Indeed, what a comparison between that wretched one and myself! What kind of learning has he? What wisdom? beauty? family? wealth?
Having heard in this way about my virtue, my honours having been recited everywhere, my hair has become stiff with the thrill of pleasure: I enjoy the uttermost happiness.
If there is any advantage which he may have, it is to be forcibly seized by us. We will give him only maintenance if he will serve us.
He is to be shaken from his happiness. He is forever to be yoked to our anguish. A hundred times, because of him, we all [have endured] that state of anguish which is Saṃsāra.
You have passed through immeasurable aeons searching for your own well-being, and you have gained only sorrow as the result of this gigantic effort.
Turn, then, according to my entreaty, without hesitation! You shall see the results at a later time, because the word of the Buddha is true.
If you previously had made this to be your object—a striving for the fulfilment of a Buddha— liberation would have occurred, and this condition of life would not have occurred.
Therefore, as you located the Ego-maker in drops of sperm and of blood, in things belonging to another, so now let it be found in others.
Make thyself a spy for the service of others, and whatsoever thou seest in thy body’s work that is good for thy fellows, perform it so that it may be conveyed to them.
Be thou jealous of thine own self when thou seest that it is at ease and thy fellow in distress, that it is in high estate and he is brought low, that it is at rest and he is at labour.
Make thine own self lose its pleasures and bear the sorrow of thy fellows; mark its deceit at each time and in each act.
Cast upon its head the guilt even of others’ works; make confession to the Great Saint of even its slightest sin.
Darken its glory by telling of the greater glory of others. Make it a carrier in thy fellow-creatures’ service, like a mean slave.
It is made of sin, and because it may have some chance morsel of goodness from without, it is not therefore worthy of praise. Let no man know its goodness.
In short, let all the wrong that thou hast done for the sake of thine own self to others fall upon thine own self for the sake of thy fellow-creatures.
Grant it no power to talk overmuch; keep it in the condition of a young bride, abashed, timid, and guarded.
Bend it to thy will by commanding it how it shall act and stand and forbear, and chastise it for disobedience.
“O my spirit, thou wilt not do as I bid thee; then I will chastise thee, for in thee all sins find a home.
Whither wilt thou go? I shall see thee, and overthrow all thy pride; the days are gone when I let myself be undone by thee.
Put away now the hope that thou canst still seek an advantage of thine own; I have sold thee into the hands of others, heeding not however much thou mayst suffer.
For if through heedlessness I deliver thee not over to my fellow-creatures, thou wilt doubtless deliver me to the warders of hell.
Many times has thou thus betrayed me, and long have I been racked; remembering these deeds of enmity, I will destroy thee, thou slave of self-seeking.”
If thou lovest thyself, thou must have no love of self; if thou wouldst save thyself, thou dost not well to be saving of self.
The more heedfully the body is guarded, the sorer are its sufferings and the deeper its fall.
But despite its fall, the whole earth cannot satisfy the lust of the flesh; who can do its will?
To him who longs for the impossible come guilt and bafflement of desire; but he who is utterly without desire has a happiness that ages not.
Then give no room for the lust of the flesh to swell; blessed indeed is the thing that is not imagined for the sake of pleasantness.
The body is a motionless thing stirred by something without, and ending in ashes, a loathsome frame of foulness; why do I cling to it?
What have I to do with this machine, alive or dead? What distinguishes it from such things as clods of earth? Alas, O thought of self, thou wilt not die!
Through complicity with the flesh I win sorrow, all to no purpose; it is no better than a thing of wood, and what should avail its hatred or its kindness?
It feels no love when I guard it, no hate when vultures devour it; then why do I love it?
I am angered when it is treated with scorn, delighted when it is honoured, but if it has no knowledge, to what end is my toil?
My friends, forsooth, are they who wish well to this body; but all men wish well to their own flesh, and why are not they also my friends?
So I have surrendered my body indifferently for the weal of the world; it is but an instrument of work that I still bear it, with all its guilt.
Enough then of worldly ways! I follow in the path of the Wise, remembering the Discourse upon Heedfulness and putting away sloth.
Just like the compassionate Sons of the Conqueror, I shall patiently accept what I have to do; for if I do not make a constant effort day and night, when will my misery ever come to an end?
To overcome the power of darkness I concentre my thought, drawing the spirit away from vain paths and fixing it straightly upon its stay.
Chapter VIII: The Perfect Contemplation
All this equipment the Sage has ordained for the sake of wisdom; so he that seeks to still sorrow must get him wisdom.
We deem that there are two verities, the Veiled Truth and the Transcendent Reality. The Reality is beyond the range of the understanding; the understanding is called Veiled Truth.
Consequently, the world is seen to be divided into two parts, that of the Yogī and that of the vulgar; and perforce the vulgar world is distinguished from the world of the Yogī.
Even Yogīs are distinguished by differences of mental power; but because the purpose of all of them is the same, the aim of all of them is valid.
Things are seen by the world and they are assumed to be real; it is not realized that they are only illusion. Thus the quarrel between the Yogī and the worldly.
Even sense perception with its [classical] argument based upon the proof of form and so forth, is not in accord with the criteria of valid knowledge. This is false, like the argument that purity and so on, is impurity and so on.
For the sake of his appearance in the world things were taught by the Lord to be momentarily real. It is not because of the veiled truth if this is contradicted.
There is no corruption because of the veiled truth of the Yogīs, since they distinguish reality from the world. Otherwise, there would be worldly afflictions for them, as in the case of unclean women.
On the other hand, how is there any value regarding so-called reality, even concerning the Conqueror, who is equated to illusion? If a being is the same as illusion, how much less is it to be born? or to have died?
As long as there is totality of causes, to that very extent, illusion conceals; for how is a profound continuity of elements really real?
There is no evil [it is argued] in the destruction of a man who is illusion, because of the absence of thought; but because thought is affected by illusion, sin and merit have arisen.
The encounter of illusion and thought is not due to the power of spells and so forth. Illusion is of different kinds, and the encounter has a variety of causes.
From what single cause is the power of everything derived? For one in transmigration, release comes both by means of transcendent truth and by means of veiled truth.
Even the Buddha [it is argued] is thus in transmigration; what good, then, is the course of Enlightenment! When causes are not cut off, certainly illusion itself is not cut off;
but because of the cutting off of causes, being exists no more as the result of veiled truth. As soon as there is no moving to and fro [or error], by what means is illusion perceived?
When illusion does not exist for you, then how is it perceived? It is just a fabrication of thought if it is otherwise than true reality.
When even thought is illusion, then what is seen? and by whom? For it is taught by the Lord of the Earth that thought does not behold thought.
As the blade of the sword does not cut itself, neither does the mind know itself. If it is thought that the self is like a lamp which illuminates,
that lamp cannot be illuminated, since it is not covered by darkness. Indeed, that which is dark is not like a crystal either: Being dark, it does not expect anything else.
Thus when light is seen by others, it is seen irrespective of darkness. It may not make itself dark by itself when it is not dark. Likewise, what darkness can make itself dark by itself? It cannot make itself dark by itself when it is not dark.
The experience of knowing that a lamp illumines is affirmed by knowledge. The experience of knowing that intelligence illumines, by what is this affirmed.
That it is illumined or not illumined, as long as it is seen by no one whatsoever, is as uselessly affirmed as the charm of a barren woman’s daughter.
If there is no act of self-knowledge, how is consciousness remembered? Memory is from an association with an exterior perception, as the poison is to the rat.
The self [it is argued] is illumined by observing its association with proximate causes; but the jar which is found by the use of magical ointment is not that ointment itself.
In this way, what is seen, what is heard, what is known, is, indeed, never denied; but still this hypothesis does not destroy the cause of sorrow.
If it is affirmed that the thing that is not illusion is none other than that which is created by thought— if that is the real, how is it other than a fabrication of illusion if it really does not exist?
If that which is seen is as unreal as illusion, then so is the one who sees the mind. If the realms of rebirth are based on reality, they must be as different [from reality] as the sky is different from reality.
When reality is based on nonreality, how can you be the one who acts? Indeed, your thought needs one companion, the nonexistent.
As long as thought is destitute of an object, then all are Buddhas. Moreover, when there is only thought, what merit is obtainable?
But [it is argued] if it is understood that thought is only the likeness of illusion, how is passion turned aside? Even as she is created, the magician falls in love with the māyā woman.
Indeed, the impression of passion, still to be understood by the magician, has not been worn out. In that moment of beholding her, his impression of the Void is weak.
By holding to the impression of the Void, it is realized that the impression of existence is nothing at all; and, afterwards, by repetition, even this is discarded.
When an existence is not accepted of which it may be said that it does not exist, then, nonexistence is without foundation: How again can it stand before the mind?
When neither existence nor nonexistence is presented again to the mind, then, through lack of any other possibility, that which is without support becomes tranquil.
As a wishing stone and a wishing tree are the fulfilment of desire, so the Body of the Conqueror is seen because of his discipline and his vow.
As a snake charmer perishes after having completed a pillar [of healing], even a long time after his perishing it still cures the effect of poison:
So also the Conqueror-pillar, having been completed by conformity to the Way of Enlightenment, does all that is to be done, even when the Bodhisattva has disappeared.
How can there be fruits when worship is made to a being without thought? Because it is taught that the one who stands [the living Buddha] and the one who is extinguished [the Buddha in Nirvāna] are equal.
And according to the Scripture, fruit is there, whether in the hidden realm or in the really real. Otherwise, how can it be thought that worshiping the true Buddha is fruitful?
But if [it is argued] release is by the teaching of the Four Noble Truths, what good is teaching of the Void? Because, following the Scripture, there is no Enlightenment except by this path.
But if [it is argued] the Mahāyāna is unproven. How is your own Scripture proven? It is proven because of both of us. It is not proven without you.
Whatever reasons make them respected, apply these to the Mahāyāna. If the true of that which is valid to both of us depends upon anyone else, then the Vedas, and the like, are true.
If it is thought that there is contention within the Mahāyāna, abandon your own Scripture because of the contention of your own sectarians with themselves and with others and with other Scriptures.
The root of religion is the life of the monk; and for the thought which depends upon props, Nirvāna is as difficult as the life of the monk is difficult.
If release is the result of the destruction of passion, it should occur immediately thereafter; but it is seen that those who are in that state still have the ability to act, although without passion.
There is no grasping if craving is controlled, but who is not distressed by this craving which is like confusion?
The cause of craving is feeling, yet they [of the Hīnayāna] are seen to have feeling. The thought which has an object must be attached to something or other.
Without the Void the imprisoned thought is reborn again, even after attainment of the stage of unconsciousness. Therefore one should cultivate the Void.
Whatever has been spoken in a sūtra, let that become manifest. If it has been hidden, it should be spoken. Nothing is known which is equal in importance to the honoured sūtras of the Mahāyāna.
If the wicked is made wholesome by having understood a single thought, how can it be denied that a single sūtra is the equal of everything taught by the Conqueror?
And whatever was spoken by those led by Mahākāśyapa is not denied. How can it be done by one like you, since he has achieved a teaching like that of the Buddha?
One remains in the realm of rebirth [our opponents argue] without achieving release from clinging and fear, for the sake of the sorrowful, because of confusion. This [they say] is the fruit of the Void.
But this objection does not touch the doctrine of the Void; therefore, the Void is to be cultivated without hesitation.
The Void is the opposite of the dark hindrances of passion and of intellect. Why does the one who desires all knowledge not cultivate it at once?
The cause of fear is whatever thing that is the birth of sorrow. The Void is the soothing of sorrow, so why should fear arise?
There may be fear from any quarter whatever if I really am anything at all; but if I am nothing whatever, whose fear will it be?
I am neither teeth, hair, nails, nor bone. Neither am I blood nor mucus nor phlegm nor pus nor lymph.
Neither am I marrow nor perspiration. Neither am I fat nor viscera. Neither am I the hidden intestines, nor am I feces or urine.
Neither am I meat nor muscle; nor am I heat or breath; nor am I the openings of the body or the six perceptions.
If there is consciousness of sound, then sound must always be perceived; for without an object of consciousness, how does one know that by which consciousness is explained?
If unconscious things are conscious, the consciousness would cling to wood. It is certain that there is no consciousness without an object of consciousness contiguous to it.
If form gives birth [to consciousness], then why does it not hear? Because there is no connection with sound? But then it is not consciousness.
Whatever consists of the perceiving of sound, how is it the perceiving of form? One person is considered both father and son, but it is not really so.
If there are really light, heat, and darkness, there is consequently neither son nor father. But one who is intent upon the perceiving of sound does not see their true nature.
Thus it is perceived by another nature, which is transient, like an actor. If this is really the nature of another, this unity is unprecedented.
If that other nature is unreal, let its innate nature be explained. If it is the faculty of knowing, then all men are identical,
and both the conscious and the unconscious are identical, because of their common existence. Insofar as difference is only apparent, what then is the basis of their identity?
The Ego [it is argued] is not unconscious because of [native] unconsciousness, like cloth, and the like, but it is conscious because of union with consciousness. The result is the destruction of unconsciousness.
But [it is argued] the self is immutable. What then happens to consciousness? Its essence is imagined to be like space: uncreated and unconscious!
But [it is argued] there is no union of cause and effect, if not yoked together by the self. When one has perished after creating a cause, whose will the effect be then?
We two are indeed in agreement that the act and the effect have different supports; but if then it is said that the self has no function, discussion certainly is useless.
If it is said that the effect is united with the cause, this union is never seen. If it has been taught that the one who acts is the one who enjoys the act, [that would involve] recourse to a unity of the phenomenal series.
The Ego is neither the past nor the future thought, because that is seen not to exist. But if the Ego is the production of thought, when that has disappeared the Ego does not exist.
Just as the stem of a banana tree does not exist when it has been divided into parts, so the Ego likewise has become unreal by being examined reflectively.
It may be thought that because a being cannot be found, there is no one upon whom to bestow compassion; but whatever is done [even] in a state of confusion is because of a purpose.
Yet if there is no being, whose is the purpose? Truly the effort is illusionary; but because it is for the sake of tranquilizing sorrow, the delusion of purpose is not forbidden.
Because of the delusion of self, the concept of one’s individuality, the cause of sorrow, is increased. Since it is destroyed in no other way, the concept of nonself is preferred.
The body is not the feet or the legs or the breast. Neither is the body, the hips, the belly, the back, nor the arms.
It is likewise not the hands or the sides or the armpits or the shoulders or any external mark. The body is not the neck or the head. What then is the body?
If the body finds itself partially in all [parts], the parts find themselves in parts, and so where does the body itself abide?
If the body is everywhere completely in every part, then there must exist as many bodies as there are parts.
The body is neither within nor without. How is the body in its parts? How is it outside its parts? How indeed does it exist?
The body does not exist, but because of delusion there is a body-idea in its parts: because of a kind of fabrication, like imagining a man in a stump.
As long as there is a complete collection of causes, the body is taken to be a man. Likewise, as long as it is in its members, the body is seen there.
In the same way there can be no foot, because that is a mass of toes. The limb is likewise a collection of limbs, separated according to their parts.
The parts also are split into atoms. The atom also is in six sections. The six sections are empty space without parts. Consequently there is no atom.
When the form is like dream, then who will deliberately fall in love with it? And since there is no body, then what is a woman? And what is a man?
If sorrow really does exist, why does it not oppress the joyful? If happiness is dainty food, why does it not please those involved in present grief?
If happiness is not experienced, because it is surpassed by something more powerful, what kind of a sensation is it when the essence is not experienced?
If sorrow is a subtle state which is destroyed by that which is gross, is it not possible that the other state is a degree of satisfaction? It follows that satisfaction is also a subtle state.
If sorrow does not arise in the presence of a contrary cause, then what is called “sensation” has arisen only because of adherence to a fiction.
This examination has for this very reason been its antidote. The food of the Yogīs is that contemplation which has arisen in the field of imagination.
If there is an interval between the sense and its object, how is there a contact between them? If there is no interval, they are a unity; and how then is there a contact?
There is no entering into an atom by an atom; it is equal [to the other atom] and without free space. Without entering there is no mingling, there is no contact.
How can contact really arise from that which is without parts? And if that without parts has been seen in contact, let it be indicated.
Contact cannot be made without consciousness, which is formless, nor with an aggregate [of parts], because of its unreality, as previously demonstrated.
If this contact is not in existence, how is it the origin of sensation? For the sake of what is this effort? Of what is the binding and why should it be?
Since there is not seen a knower nor any kind of sensation, O thirst! beholding this situation, why are you not split asunder?
Sensation is seen and it is touched, but by thought [only], which itself is like the sleep of māyā. Because of its very nature, due to that thought, sensation is not seen.
In this birth neither that which was before not that which will be afterwards is remembered or perceived. It does not perceive itself, nor is it perceived by another.
There is not a knower, therefore there is not really any sensation. Since this bundle is composed of nothing, how can one be oppressed by it?
The mind is not in the senses, or in shapes, or within. Thought, also, is not grasped inside or outside or anywhere else.
Whatever is not the body and not otherwise—not combined and not isolated—what is it? It is because of this that beings are by nature completely in Nirvāṇa.
If knowledge is prior to that which is known, what is its original support? If knowledge is simultaneous with that which is known, what is its original support?
Likewise, if it should be subsequent to that which is known, then from where can knowledge come? And so the arising of all momentary impressions is impossible.
If, in this way, there is nothing hidden, then why two truths? or rather, if something is hidden, why are beings released?
The one [who is released] is the imagination of another’s thought; but he does not exist because of being hidden. He is arrived at afterwards. Likewise, if he does not exist, his hiddenness does not exist.
The imagination and the thing imagined are both mutually dependent. Thus it is said that all examination is dependent upon the prearranged.
But if that to be examined is examined by what is already examined, then there is no validity to that examination by what is already examined.
When what is to be examined has been examined by what is examined, then there is no validity to that examination by what is already examined.
But they for whom this is truth are in a perpetually bad position. If an object is dependent upon knowledge, what has become of the reality of knowledge?
Likewise, if knowledge is dependent upon that which is to be known, what has become of the reality of that which is to be known? Because of mutual dependence, the reality of both is nullified.
If there is no father without a son, what is the origin of the son? If there is no son, the father does not exist. Thus the nonreality of both of them.
The plant is born from the seed, and the seed is indicated by it: Why is it not understood that [so-called] reality has arisen only by means of knowing that which is [thought to be] knowable?
From the plant it is understood that there exists a seed; from knowledge, the contrary. Whence the idea of the existence of knowledge, by means of which whatever is to be known is known?
The world, by merely visible perception, regards causation as universal. From a variety of causes arises the variety of the lotus, its stalk and the like.
And what has made this variety of cause? The variety of antecedent cause. And why does cause produce effect? The efficacy of the antecedent cause.
The Lord is the cause of the world? Then explain who is the Lord. If he is the elements, let it be so. What pains are bestowed upon a mere name!
But the earth and the other [elements] are not the Lord. They are multiple; some are transient and without activity and ungodly; they may even be neglected and they are impure.
The Lord is not space, because it is without activity. He is not ātman, as already refuted. If he is unknowable, then as a creator he is also unknowable. What can be said of him?
And what does he desire to create? If the ātman, is it not eternal? The earth, and so forth? It is self-existent. A deity? The same. Knowledge? Without beginning: It proceeds from the knowable.
Likewise, happiness and sorrow are from action. Tell what is made by him? For if there is no beginning of causation how can there be a beginning of effect?
Why does he not always act? For he is not dependent upon another, because there is nothing which is not made by him. Why is he dependent upon it?
If he is dependent upon the totality of things, then the Lord is not its cause. The Lord is not able to act when the totality is complete; and yet he cannot act when it is nonexistent.
If the Lord acts without desire it follows that he is dependent. If he has desire he is likewise dependent upon that desire. When he acts, where is the quality of Lordliness?
Those who say that atoms are eternal already have been refuted. The Sāṃkhyas seek primary matter as the eternal cause of the world.
They teach that primary matter is the equilibrium of the natural qualities, thought to be light, heat, and darkness. The world is said to exist because of their equilibrium.
That which by its own nature is threefold is not a unity. Because of this, such unity does not exist. Even the guṇas are not perceived, since they are each threefold.
Since the guṇas do not exist, the existence of sound and so forth, is very remote. It is an impossibility that pleasure, and so forth, is to be found in an unconscious object such as clothing.
If [it is argued] forms are the cause of things, the existence of things certainly has been refuted. Moreover, your cause is pleasure; it follows that it is not clothing and the like.
But if pleasure is [derived from such things as] clothing then pleasure is nonexistent when clothing is nonexistent. Things of pleasure are never obtained eternally by anyone.
If pleasure is always in the developed state [of the guṇas] why is there no perception of it? If it changes to the subtle state, how can it be both gross and subtle?
Having abandoned the gross, it becomes subtle. Whether gross or subtle, it is impermanent. Why do you not desire the impermanence of all that exists?
If the gross is not different from pleasure, it is clear that pleasure is impermanent. If it is thought that nothing can arise from nonexistence, because it is nonexistent,
still you admit reluctantly the arising of that which is manifest, but non-existent. If the effect is contained in the cause, then the one who eats, consumes excrement.
Also, for the price of the garment, one has bought the seed of the cotton-tree, without wearing it. If because of delusion the world does not see it, your wise man likewise stands in the same position.
If the faculty of knowing belongs to the world, why does it not see? Manifest appearance is nonexistent, but it is this which constitutes the world’s criterion of proof.
Yet if this criterion of proof is not criterion of proof, then what is understood as false. It follows, in fact, that the Emptiness of creatures does not arise.
If it is assumed that existence is intangible, then non-existence cannot be conceived. If follows that if whatever exists is false, then nonexistence is certainly false.
It follows that when in a dream one’s son is destroyed, he is not thought to be an object of imagination. The false assumption which has arisen eliminates his existence, which is also false.
It thus follows from this examination that there is nothing whatever without causation and there is likewise nothing contained in causes, whether in their totality or in their parts.
Nothing is otherwise perceived, whether it remains or it goes. What is the difference between this [world of causation] and a creation of magic which the stupid consider to be reality?
Whatever is fabricated by illusion, and whatever is fabricated by causes, where does it come from? and where does it go? Thus reflect!
Whatever is seen because of the proximity of something else, that is unreal. When it is as artificial as a reflection, how is it real?
When something is existent, what use is a cause? Likewise, when it is nonexistent, what use is a cause?
Even thousands of millions of aeons can cause no change in nonbeing. How can anything in that state exist? Or how can that which is nonbeing come to a state of being?
If being does not exist in the time of nonbeing, when will it become being? Indeed, that nonbeing will not disappear as long as being is in a state of not being born.
And when nonbeing has not disappeared, there is no possible opportunity for being. And being does not go into a state of nonbeing, a state of adherence to two natures.
Thus there is never either cessation or existence; the universe neither comes to be nor halts in being.
Life’s courses, if thou considerest them, are like dreams and as the plantain’s branches; in reality there is no distinction between those that are at rest and those that are not at rest.
Since then the forms of being are empty, what can be gained, and what lost? who can be honoured or despised, and by whom?
Whence should come joy or sorrow? What is sweet, what bitter? What is desire, and where shall this desire in verity be sought?
If thou considerest the world of living things, who shall die therein? who shall be born, who is born? who is a kinsman and who a friend, and to whom.
Would that my fellow-creatures should understand that all is as the void! They are angered and delighted by their matters of strife and rejoicing;
with grief and labour, with despair, with rending and stabbing one another, they wearily pass their days in sin as they seek their own pleasure;
they die and fall into hells of long and bitter anguish; they return again and again to happy births after births and grow wonted to joy.
In existence are many precipices, and yet they are endowed with unreality. There is mutual cessation, and yet there can be nothing endowed with reality.
In life are oceans of sorrow, fierce and boundless beyond compare, a scant measure of power, a brief term of years;
our years are spent in vain strivings for existence and health, in hunger, faintness, and labour, in sleep, in vexation, in fruitless commerce with fools,
and discernment is hard to win; how shall we come to restrain the spirit from its wont of wandering?
There, too, the Spirit of Desire is labouring to cast us into deep hells; there evil paths abound, and unbelief can scarce be overcome;
it is hard to win a brief return, exceeding hard for the Enlightened to arise to us; the torrent of passion can scarce be stayed. Alas, how sorrow follows on sorrow!
Alas, how lamentable is the estate of them that are borne down in the floods of affliction, and in their sore distress see not how sad their plight is,
like one who should again and again come forth from the waters of his bath and cast himself into the fire, and so in their sore trouble deem themselves to be in happy estate!
As thus they live in sport that knows not of age and dissolution, dire afflictions will come upon them, with Death in their forefront.
Then when will the day come when I may bring peace to them that are tortured in the fire of sorrow by my ministrations of sweetness born from the rain-clouds of my righteousness,
and when I may reverently declare to the souls who imagine a real world that all is void, and righteousness is gathered by looking beyond the Veiled Truth?
Chapter IX: The Perfect Knowledge
Whatever benefit is mine from creating this Introduction to the Way of Enlightenment, by it may all beings become ornaments to the Way of Enlightenment.
Let as many beings as there are in all places, who are suffering pain of body or of thought, obtain by my merits oceans of happiness and of joy.
As long as there is rebirth, may there be no loss of happiness to them in any way. May the world unceasingly obtain the happiness of the Bodhisattva.
In as many hells as are found in all spheres of the universe, may beings enjoy the happiness and the pleasures of paradise.
May those who suffer from cold obtain heat, and may those who suffer from heat be cooled by the oceans of rains produced by the great Bodhisattva-clouds.
May the sword-leaf forest of Yama’s hell become the majestic forest of Indra’s paradise, and the torturing trees be reborn as wishing trees.
May the regions of hell become charming, with lakes filled with the perfumes of unbounded lotus, and with the beauty and delightful cries of geese, ducks, cranes, and swans.
May the charcoal mound become a heap of jewels. And may the heated earth become a crystal pavement. And may the crushing mountains become celestial mansions filled with Buddhas.
May the shower of swords, stones, and burning charcoal be henceforth a flower-rain; and the unceasing battle of swords be afterwards a joyful flower-battle for the sake of sport.
May those who are submerged in the burning waters of the river of hell—their skeleton-bodies the colour of jasmine, their flesh wholly destroyed—obtain by the power of my merit, celestial natures and live by the river of heaven with the goddesses.
May the trembling demons of Yama and the terrible crows and vultures suddenly behold the darkness dispersed; and ask themselves, “who can illumine with moonlight, begetting happiness and joy on every side?” and having seen flaming Vajrapāṇi coming through the firmament, having beheld freedom from sin and seen distress disappear, may they thus embrace with him.
Let fall a lotus-rain mingled with perfumed waters so that even the dwellers of hell may be quieted. Let them wonder, “What is this?” as they are refreshed with happiness. Let Kamalapāṇi appear to the inhabitants of hell.
Come! Come, quickly! Let fear depart! brothers who were living beings. That Prince with necklaces, the flaming bearer of peace, has descended to us; he at whose gesture all calamity disappears, floods of pleasure arise, the total Thought of Enlightenment is born, and also compassion, the mother-refuge of all beings.
Behold! At the foot of his lotus are the shining diadems of hundreds of gods. At his head, his vision blurred with compassion, there is a rainstorm of many flowers falling from pleasing aerial palaces wherein thousands of feminine divinities sing his praises. Let there resound also, as is proper, the acclamation of those in hell as they behold Mañjughoṣa before them.
By my merits may those in hell welcome the appearance of clouds of Bodhisattvas; freed from hindrance; headed by Samantabhadra; joyful, cool, sweet-smelling, windy rains.
Let them quiet the intense agonies and fears of hell. May those dwelling in misfortune be released from their misfortunes.
May the fear vanish which animals have of being eaten by one another. May ghosts become happy beings like the men of northern India.
May ghosts be refreshed; may they be bathed, and always cooled, by the streams of milk trickling from the fingers of the noble Avalokiteśvara.
May the blind behold forms. May the deaf always hear, and may pregnant women give birth, like Queen Māyā [mother of the Buddha] without pain.
May all have clothes, food and drink, garlands, sandalwood fragrance, ornaments, all that the heart desires, and all that is most advantageous.
And let the fearful be without fear, and those afflicted with sorrow be the obtainers of joy; and let those distressed be without distress, and at peace.
Let the sick be well; let all be freed from bondage; let the weak be strong, and thoughts mutually affectionate.
May every region be auspicious for those who travel on the road. May everything prosper which will help them get to their homes.
And may those held back by a sea voyage find fulfilment of their heart’s desire. Having peacefully arrived at shore, may they rejoice with their parents.
May those who have fallen into a trackless waste find themselves encountering a caravan, and may they travel without fatigue and without fear of robbers, tigers, and the like.
May the gods protect the sleepers, the insane, the heedless, the ones in danger in pestilent forest or the like—the helpless, whether young or old.
May they be freed from all importunities; possessing faith, wisdom, and compassion; endowed with good appearance and conduct; and always remembering previous births.
May they have boundless treasures like the Gaganagañja. May they be free from opposing commitments, without expedients, and grow in dependence upon one’s self.
May beings who have little strength become of great strength. May those who are wretched and deformed become endowed with beautiful form.
Whoever are women in the world, may they achieve manhood. Let the lowly obtain it and yet let them remain without pride.
By these my merits may beings everywhere, without exception, having desisted from all evils, always behave in a proper manner;
not be separated from the Thought of Enlightenment; be devoted to the Way of Enlightenment, surrounded by Buddhas, and free from the works of Māra.
Thus may all beings have unlimited spans of life. May their lives be eternally happy. May even the word “death” perish.
May all regions be filled with Buddhas and Buddha-sons, and be made enjoyable by parks of wishing trees and by the fascinating sound of the Dharma.
May the earth be everywhere devoid of gravel and smooth as the hand’s palm, pliant, and filled with cat’s eye jewels.
May groups of Bodhisattvas in great assemblies sit in all places. May they adorn the surface of the earth with their splendour.
By means of all birds and trees, and even by rays from the sky, may the sound of the Dharma be heard unceasingly by all beings.
May they eternally be in union with Buddhas and Buddha-sons, and with endless clouds of worship may they reverence the Guru of the World.
May the god send rain in due season, and the rain be abundant, and the earth be rich, and the king abide in the Law.
And may medicinal herbs be powerful; may spells of invocations succeed; may demons (ḍākinīs, rākṣasas, and such) be active in compassion.
May no being whatsoever be unhappy, sinful, sick, forsaken, or despised; and none whatsoever wretched or melancholy.
May the monasteries be prosperous and full of good reading and recitation. May the congregation be eternally complete, and the work of the congregation prosper.
May the monks be those who attain discrimination and zeal for the discipline. May they meditate with thoughts skilful and freed from all distraction.
May the nuns be accepted, free from quarrels and weariness. Let them observe the entire rule. Thus all may become true mendicants.
May the ill-behaved be terrified, always devoted to the diminution of evil. Those who would find Buddhahood, may their vows be unbroken.
May the scholars be honoured, received, and given alms. Let their lineage be pure; let it be universally known and praised.
Not suffering the sorrow of existing in an evil state, without painful experience, may living beings obtain the state of Buddhahood by means of a unique and celestial body.
May all the company of Buddhas be worshipped in all ways by all beings. May they be exceedingly happy with inconceivable Buddha happiness.
May that which has been desired by the Bodhisattvas for the sake of the world succeed. Whatever those Lords think, may it be accomplished by beings.
In like manner, let Pratyekabuddhas and Śrāvakas be happy, eternally worshipped with respect by gods, antigods, and men.
May I obtain the memory of previous births, and may I attain forever the Level of Delight, by the help of Mañjughoṣa.
In whatever position may I maintain possession of power. In all births may I obtain the total perfume of discrimination.
As long as I desire to see and to question him in any way whatever, may I behold without hindrance the Lord Mañjunātha.
As Mañjuśrī walks in ten directions and to the sky’s edge for the furthering of the prosperity of all beings, let my career be like his.
As long as the existence of space and as long as the existence of the world, that long let my existence be devoted to the world’s sorrows.
Whatever the sorrow of the world, may all that ripen in me; and may the world be comforted by all of the glorious Bodhisattvas.
Only medicine for the world’s sorrow, cause of all happiness and success, may the teaching [of the Buddha], accompanied by benefit and honour, endure for a long time.
I pay homage to Mañjughoṣa by the favor which makes beautiful the thought. I honour the Good Friend by the favour which he has thus increased.
X: Consummation

